Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 0
Motor Control

WEEK 7, LECTURE 1

 

Alright everyone, welcome back! I hope you all had a good exam ~ or as good
as itcan be, given that you had to take an exam,

We're now in week 7 (I can’t believe how fast the quarter has gone by!), and.
we're going to start the first of our last four lecture series. This week's topic is
(on motor movements

And again, | apologize for having to write out notes to you all instead of
‘giving the lectures verbally. This isn’t ideal for any of us, but I wouldn't be
doing it this way if I didn't absolutely have to. With that in mind, I'm going to
‘try and make these notes as clear and conversational as possible.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 1
This lecture series will cover.
Motor control
Brain mechanisms involved in movement.

Movement disorders

 

Here's what's on the agenda for this week. We'll be covering how our muscles
‘work and connect to our brains, how our brain coordinates various sensory and
‘motivational processes to execute movements, and also what happens when
‘movements malfunction, So let's get started!

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 2
The Control of Movement

Ultimately, the brain is linked to the concept of doing something, that is,
movement

Internal processing would be useless without the ability to react to the
environments (e.g, move)

 

[read through the slide]

Basically, the function of the brain is to interact with the world, and we need
‘movement to do that. Our brains have another important function that we've
been talking about these past two weeks ~ to provide a coherent picture of the
‘world, which is provided via our sensory organs and the systems that integrate
‘that information... but what do we do with sensory information once we have
it? We use it to move about successfully ~ to obtain food, to find mates, to
avoid dangers ~ essentially, to survive.

So I think you can make a strong argument for movement being one of the
primary functions of the brain,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 3
Muscles and Their Movements

All animal movement depends on muscle contractions of one of three (or
‘a combination of) types of muscles.

= Smooth muscles: control the digestive system and other organs

© Skeletal/striated muscles: control movement of the body in relation to the

environment

«Cardiac muscles: heart muscles that have properties of skeletal and smooth
muscles

 

‘The first thing we should talk about when we talk about movement is the
different structures that allow us to move. This is mainly accomplished by
‘muscles. And in animals, all movement depends on muscle contractions,
‘which you can think of as the tensing up of muscles. All animals” muscles can
‘be divided into three types, and all animals use different combinations of these
three types to move in different ways.

[read through the different types]

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 4
Three Categories of Vertebrate Muscles

SeletayStiated Cadac

 

This is a really nice picture that delineates the three different types of muscle:

+ Smooth muscle, which is found in the intestines and other organs, consists,
of these long, thin cells.

+ Skeletal or striated muscle consists of long cylindrical fibers with stripes —
hence the term striated, which is another term for “linear marks” or
“stripes”

+ And finally we have cardiac muscle, which is found solely in the heart, and
which consists of fibers that fuse together at various points. Because of
these fusions, cardiac muscles contract together rather than independently

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 5
Muscle Fibers

‘Muscles are composed of many individual fibers
© Each muscle fiber receives information from only one axon, but a single axon
‘may innervate many muscle fibers

«The fewer number of fibers that are innervated by an axon, the more precise

the movements (e.g, eye muscles)

© The greater number of fibers that are innervated by an axon, the less precise
the movements (e.g, bicep muscles)

 

So let's drill down further and look at what muscles are made of. Go ahead and
read through the slide to get an idea of how these structures are broken down
into their component parts

Speaking to these last two bullet points, why is it like that? Think about the
fovea, and how one cone connects to one bipolar cell, and that one bipolar cell
connects to one midget ganglion cell, and so on. The fact that a single cone has
a direct route to the brain means that there's no interference coming from other
neurons ~ so visual information from the fovea ends up being very precise.

‘The same is true for muscle fibers: fewer connections means less interference,
‘which enables more precision in movement.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 6
Muscle Fibers

‘A neuromuscular junction is a
synapse between a motor neuron
axon and a muscle fiber

Release of acetylcholine causes the

muscle to contract

 

Motor neurons are connected to muscle fibers, and the synapse between them
is known as a neuromuscular junction,

Motor neurons release acetylcholine into the neuromuscular junction, and
‘when acetylcholine binds to receptors on the muscle, it causes a contraction,

‘Now; I'm definitely not expecting you to know any of the processes here, but I
‘think this diagram is worth taking a moment to study. Ask yourself how this
reaction is similar to what you know about action potentials and the release of
neurotransmitters in the synapse. At this point in the class it's probably a litle
‘overwhelming to look ata frst, but the more you look ati, the more it should
start to seem familiar to you. Look how much progress we've made! ©

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 7
Antagonistic Muscles

‘Muscles only receive signals to
contract (via acetylcholine)

Movement requires the alternating
contraction of opposing sets of

muscles called antagonistic muscles

‘Two types of antagonistic muscles:
‘Aflexor muscle is one that flexes or
raises an appendage (e.g, biceps)

© An extensor muscle is one that
extends an appendage or straightens
it(eg, triceps)

 

Muscles only receive signals to contract, which as I said previously is,
accomplished through the transmission of acetylcholine. And they relax in the
absence of this signal.

‘Similarly, there are no signals which tell muscles to move in the opposite
direction ~ this is accomplished through the contraction of opposing sets of
‘muscles which are called antagonistic muscles.

‘There are two types of antagonistic muscles, which you can read about on this
slide.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 8
Fast and Slow Muscles

‘Skeletal muscle types range fror
* Fasttwitch: fibers produce fast contractions, but fatigue rapidly
« Slow-twiteh: fibers produce less vigorous contractions, without fatigue

 

Muscles themselves are made up of muscle fibers, and in skeletal muscles, this
‘produces two types of muscles: fast- and slow-twitch. You can read brief
descriptions of these above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 9
Fast and Slow Muscles

People have varying percentages of fast-twitch and slowetwiteh muscles

Sow-twtch fibers are aerobic (requires cxygen during movement) and therefore do not fatigue
™ Nonstrenous or sustained actives ize slow-twitch and intermediate muscle fibers
Fasttwiteh fibers are anaerobic (4 not require oxygen during movement, but need itto
resulting in fatigue
avo requiring quick movernents ue fast-twitch fibers

 

[read through the slide frst]

Both of these fibers use oxygen like currency, but slow-twitch fibers use
‘oxygen as they're active, so they can be sustained for a lot longer. Fast-twitch
fibers don’t use oxygen when they're active, but they'll need oxygen to
replenish themselves eventually. So they typically occur in short, strong bursts
‘of movement.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 10
Muscle Control by Proprioceptors

Proprioceptors: receptors that detect the
position or movement of a part of the body “===

‘Muscle spindles are proprioceptors parallel
to the muscle that responds to a stretch >

‘cause a contraction of the muscle
A stretch reflex occurs when muscle
proprioceptors detect the stretch and tension
of a muscle and send messages to the spinal
cord to contract it

* Example: Knee-jerk reflex

 

We have an ability to automatically and unconsciously make adjustments to
our bodies in response to small physical changes in this environment. This is,
accomplished by proprioceptors, which are receptors that continually detect
the position of your body relative to its surroundings.

‘One type of proprioceptor is called a muscle spindle. Muscle spindles lie
parallel to the muscle that responds to a stretching motion. Whenever a muscle
stretched, the muscle spindle sends a message to a motor neuron in the
spinal cord, which in tun sends a signal that triggers the opposing muscle to
contract. This keeps us from over-extending our muscles when we move. This
broad set of movements is known as a stretch reflex. A knee-jerk reflex is a
type of stretch reflex: when something hits our knee at just the right place, our
knee will make a small jerking motion, but won't extend our leg all the way.
out. This isa stretch reflex in action.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 11
Muscle Control by Proprioceptors

The Golgi tendon organs
another type of proprioceptor
that responds to increases in
muscle tension

© Located in the tendons at the

‘opposite ends of the muscle

© Acts as a “brake” against
excessively vigorous
contraction by sending an
impulse to the spinal cord
where motor neurons are
inhibited

 

Another type of proprioceptor, the Golgi tendon organ, responds to increases
in muscle tension. It’s located in a very small area, at opposing ends of a
‘muscle, in the tendons. And its function is to essentially prevent muscles from
‘over-contracting,

So basically, when a muscle contracts, Golgi tendon organs send signals to the
spinal cord, and these signals activate inhibitory neurons. This stops the
‘muscle from contracting too much, which could potentially cause a lot of
damage.

So both muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs function to keep muscles
from over-exerting themselves. This is very important, because a lot of muscle
‘movements are reflexive ~ meaning they tend to occur automatically. So we
need something in place to automatically keep these reflexes from being too
vigorous.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 12
‘Two kinds of proprioceptors
regulate muscle contractions

Muscle is stretched > nerves from
muscle spindles stimulate
contraction of the muscle

Once muscle is contracted > Golgi
tendon organ keeps contraction from
being too quick/extreme

 

This is a nice depiction of how these two types of proprioceptors work in
tandem.

When a muscle is stretched, nerves from the muscle spindles, which are
located on muscles transmit impulses that lead to contraction of the muscle.
When a muscle is contracted, that stimulates the Golgi tendon organ, whi
located here on the muscle tendon. The organ acts as a brake or shock
absorber to prevent a contraction that is too quick or extreme. You can follow
‘the pathways of each, and in the spinal cord you can see that the muscle
fibers have an excitatory effect (indicated by the plus signs in the spinal cord),
\which the Golgi tendon organs have an inhibitory one (indicated by the minus
signs in the spinal cord).

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 13
Voluntary and Involuntary Movements

Reflexes are involuntary, consistent, and automatic responses to stimuli

‘Most movements are a combination of voluntary (non-reflexive) and
involuntary (reflexive)

‘Movements vary with respect to feedback.

© Some are ballistic > cannot be changed once initiated.

+ Others are guided by feedback and are more controlled

 

So that’s how different muscles interact with motor neurons. Let's talk about
movement more generally.

Movement can roughly be divided into two types: voluntary and involuntary.
Reflexes ~ which are what we've been talking about so far ~ are involuntary.
‘They're also consistent, in that they respond the same way to the same type of
stimulation every time, And they are also automatic, meaning they occur in
response to a stimulus without interference (although they can be interrupted).

 

Importantly - even though you can divide up movement into voluntary and
involuntary, most movements are a combination of both.

Movements also vary with respect to feedback from the environment. Some
are “ballistic,” meaning once they start, you can't stop them. This includes
‘most reflexes. Others are more sensitive to feedback and are thus more under
voluntary control. Your book uses an example of threading a needle ~ thi
something that requires feedback from the environment to tell you whether
you need to adjust the position of the thread, the needle, or both,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 14
Sequences of Behaviors

Many behaviors consis of rapid sequences of individual movements

Central pattern generators > neural mechanisms in the spinal cord that
generate rhythmic patterns of motor output
* Example: wing flapping in birds or "wet dog shake”

 

[read through this slide first]

In terms of central pattern generators, the thing that causes them to do their
thing does not control how fast it's done once it starts. Unless there's
something wrong, a given dog will always shake at the same frequency once
that behavior is initiated.

| looked up “wet dog shake” to give you some visuals, and it really paid off
although I'm sad you won't be able to see these as gifs, because they're really
‘magnificent, Dogs are very floppy, apparently. But importantly! This is an
example of a motion pattern that will always occur at the same frequency once
initiated. The motion pattern itself is generated in the spinal cord, and
interestingly, this pattern will be initiated even if the neurons involved are
isolated from the brain or the muscles involved are paralyzed. The shake may
ultimately look different, but the pattern will still be initiated regardless. t's
like executing a computer program, even if they underlying hardware isn’t
capable of performing it

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 15
Sequences of Behaviors
Many behaviors consist of rapid sequences of individual movements
‘A motor program refers toa fied sequence

‘of movements that is either learned or built
into the nervous system

© Once begun, the sequence is fixed from
beginning to end

« Automatic, but thinking or talking about it
can interfere with the action

«= Examples: mouse grooming itself; yawning

 

One specific type of central pattem generator is called a motor program. This
refers to a fixed sequence of movements ~ and it can either be learned, or
“innate” (side note: I actually don't like using the term innate because it’s,
often misunderstood, but I think it works here).

A central pattern generator isa type of motor program that is mainly initiated
in the spinal cord. But there are many other types of motor programs out there.
For any motor program, though, once it begins, the sequence is fixed. Your
book has a great example of a cat scratching: once initiated, a cat will scratch
at roughly the same frequency, for roughly the same duration. Other examples
include yawning (in all animals that yawn) or grooming patterns in mice. And
as.a side note: many of these patterns are initiated automatically, but can also
be interrupted once started, You can, for example, interrupt someone in the
‘middle of yawning ~ they might not like you for doing it, but you can do it
nonetheless.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 1 - Motor Control - Page 16
Questions for your discussion group...

4. Why are slow-twitch muscles better for sustained movement, and fast-
‘twitch muscles better for short bursts of movement?

‘What are central pattern generators? Give an example of one that was
not given in lecture or your book.

 

‘Okay, that does it for this lecture! Hopefully reading my notes hasn't been too
bad @

Thave two discussion questions for you here, and then we'll move on to the
next lecture: brain mechanisms of movement. See you there!