Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 0
Sex, hormones, and

reproductive behavior

WEEK 10, LECTURE 1

 

So, | attempted to record these lectures, and my voice died about halfway
through. Apparently I can hold full conversations, but I can’t speak
continuously for a lengthy period of time. Unfortunately, our very last lecture
is going to be via notes... and on a topic not listed on the syllabus,

‘The good news is that this topic is actually a side specialty of mine, and so 1
feel like I can provide you with more comprehensive notes. With that in
mind... let's get started!

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 1
This lecture series will cover...

Sex and hormones

Male vs. female reproductive behavior

Variations in sexual behavior

 

So here's our agenda for today, which you can read over briefly

"Now, in giving this lecture I realize that sex and gender are incredibly complex
topics. Lam admittedly reducing the topic to a binary discussion of male and
female hormones (although the second part of this lecture will cover
variations), because here we're considering sex only’as.a vehicle for
reproduction (and even that statement is an oversimplification). To reduce the
discussion inthis way does a disservice to the broader topic of sex and gender,
but because this isa biopsychology class I am going to focus primarily on the
role of hormones in sexual reproduction. I am happy to discuss any other
topics outside of this class.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 2
Introduction

Sexual reproduction between two individuals increases variation in the
gene pool

Benefits of variation in the gene pool of a species
«Enables quick evolutionary adaptations to changes in the environment

© Corrects genetic errors and disadvantageous mutations

 

So in the past I've taught a class on Human Mating Psychology from an
evolutionary perspective. It was a fun class to teach, and this lecture has alittle
bit of overlap with that class ~ although it really just skims the surface. If
‘you're interested in this material, I highly recommend that class!

In any case, one of the first questions we can ask about reproductive behaviors,
involves the act of sexual reproduction itself. Given that some organisms can
reproduce asexually, why don’t we al just do that? Why involve another
individual, who potentially carries disease or can otherwise physically harm
us? Well, the primary argument in favor of sexual reproduction involves
‘genetic diversity. This has it’s own benefits, which you can read about above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 3
Sex and Hormones

Prenatal sexual differentiation begins with the chromosomes

Female mammals have two X chromosomes and males have an X and a Y
During an early stage of prenatal development, both male and female
have a set of Millerian ducts and a set of Wolffian ducts, as well as
undifferentiated gonads

 

We're mainly going to be using a definition of sex and sex differentiation that
starts at the chromosomal level. There are many other ways to define sex and
‘gender, but since this is a class that takes a biological approach, we're going to
discuss sex in this context.

With that in mind, sex differentiation begins prenatally ~ as soon as an egg and
aa sperm cell meet, an ovum is formed, and that ovum has a specific make-up
Of sex chromosomes. There are two types of duets present at this point:
Mullerian ducts and Wolffian ducts, which both males and females possess. At
this stage in development, males and females also both have undifferentiated
‘gonads.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 4
Wolffian and Millerian Ducts

During an early stage of prenatal development, both male and female
have a set of Millerian ducts and a set of Wolffian ducts, as well as
undifferentiated gonads

Wolffian ducts are the precursors to other male reproductive organs

© Develop into the vas deferens and seminal vesicles

Millerian ducts are precursors to the female's oviducts, uterus, and upper
vagina

 

For more information about the two ducts mentioned on the previous slide,
‘you can read through the slide above.

And like I mentioned previously, in the earliest stages of development, an
embryo has both of these ducts. It’s only later that anatomical sex
differentiation begins.

So how does this process of anatomical sex differentiation work?,

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 5
The SRY Gene

The Y chromosome includes the SRY gene

© Causes the primitive gonads to develop into testes, the sperm-producing
organs

© Developing testes then produce androgens

* Increase testes growth
« Also produce Millerian inhibiting hormone (Mlk) that causes the Millrian ducts
to degenerate
Females lack the SRY gene and their gonads develop into ovaries, the egg-
producing organs
“= Wolffian ducts degenerate in the absence of androgens

 

Let’s start with genetic males. Genetic males have a Y chromosome, and this Y
‘chromosome contains something called the SRY gene. Once activated, this
‘gene causes the undifferentiated gonads to develop into testes.

‘Testes start producing androgens (which are considered male hormones), and
these androgens both enhance growth of the testes and produce a hormone
(Mallerian inhibiting hormone), which causes the Mullerian ducts to
degenerate.

Genetic females do not have the SRY gene, and because of that their
undifferentiated gonads begin to develop into ovaries. Without the absorption
of androgens, Wolffian ducts degenerate.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 6
Differentiation of Human Gonads

 

Here's how that all shakes out. So very early on, the embryo does not have
differentiated structures ~ that is, the fetus looks the same whether it's
‘genetically male or female. The fetus has primitive gonads, which are shown
here in blue, and these will either develop into testes or ovaries, depending.
cn the presence or absence of the SRY gene.

‘The fetus also has both types of ducts (Wolffian and Mullerian), and these
develop differently depending on the messages being sent out from the
different sex chromosomes. Millerian ducts develop into a female's uterus,
oviducts, and the upper part of the vagina. And the Wolffian ducts develop
into a male's seminal vesicles and vas deferens. Eventually, the Millerian
ducts degenerate in males, and the Wolffian ducts degenerate in females.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 7
Hormones in Males and Females

‘Androgens and estrogens are types of steroid hormones

Testes produce more androgens than estrogens
Ovaries produce more estrogens than androgens

 

‘Once the gonads differentiate, they begin to produce a specific type of
hormone called steroid hormones. These hormones are different for males and
females, with androgens being considered “male” hormones, and estrogens
being considered “female” hormones.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 8
Steroid Hormones

Contain four carbon rings, and exert
their effects in three ways.
© Bind to membrane receptors lke
neurotransmitters
«Enter cells and activate certain kinds. Estradiol (type of
Of proteins in the cytoplasm estrogen) and
© Bind to chromosomes where they testosterone (type of

activate or inactivate certain genes androgen) have very

 

‘There are actually a number of different steroid hormones, including things
like cortisol as well as sex hormones. Broadly speaking, steroid hormones
consist of four carbon rings - you can compare the structure in the diagram
above. Also in the diagram above, note the structural similarities between
estradiol (which is a type of estrogen) and testosterone (which is a type of
androgen). These structures are similar, but still distinct from one another —
and importantly this distinction leads to differential effects in specific areas of
the body.

‘Now, steroid hormones exert their effects in three ways, which you can read
about above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 9
Steroid Hormones

Contain four carbon rings, and exert
their effects in three ways.
© Bind to membrane receptors lke
neurotransmitters
© Enter cells and activating certain kinds
of proteins in the cytoplasm
© Bind to chromosomes where they
activate or inactivate certain genes

 

‘This is just a diagram of how these three different actions are accomplished.
You have your steroid hormone circled in red here, on the outside of a
‘membrane, and listed on this slide are these are the three things it can do. If
‘you follow the leftmost arrow, you can see that it can bind to different
proteins, which will cause them to activate.

 

Ifyou follow the middle arrow, you can see that it can bind to a receptor
molecule, which then goes on to activate or inactivate specific genes.

 

And on the right, it can bind to receptors in the membrane, much like
neurotransmitters. So steroid hormones are actually fairly versatile types of
hormones.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 10
Androgens and Estrogens

Categories of cher
© Androgens
* Group of primarily male hormones
«Testosterone isthe most widely known
+ Estrogens
* Most common is estradiol
+ Progesterone

icals, not chemicals themselves

* Prepares the uterus forthe implantation ofa fertiized ovum (ge)
+ Promotes the maintenance of pregnancy

 

‘There are a number of different types of androgens and estrogens, and we'll be
talking about a few key players today. You can read more about them above,
and you should try to familiarize yourself with all of them, as they'll be
‘coming up a lot in this lecture series.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 11
Genes and Sex Differences

Hormones do not account for all the biological differences between
males and females
© Genes on the X and Y chromosomes also produce sex differences

At least three genes on the Y chromosome are active in specific brain
areas

At least one gene on the X chromosome is active only in the female
brain

 

So it used to be thought that hormones accounted for ALL of the sex
differences between males and females, but it tums out that’s not exactly the
‘case. There are specific genes on the X and Y chromosomes which activate
specific areas in the brain without the use of hormones.

So, for example, at least three genes on the Y chromosome are active in
specific brain areas, and at least one gene on the X chromosome that is only
active in the female brain,

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 12
Organizing Effects of Sex Hormones

Organizing effects produce long-lasting structural effects,

© Occur at sensitive periods of development (before birth and at puberty in
humans)

© Determine whether the brain and body will develop male or female

characteristics

In contrast, activating effects of sex hormones...

= Occur at any time of lfe and temporarily activate a particular response
« Examples: pregnancy, menstruation

 

So we have two different categories of hormones ~ androgens and estrogens.
Let’s talk about how these hormones can effect development and behavior in
males and females. When we talk about the effects of hormones, we talk about
‘them in two different ways. These are organizing effects and activating effects,
‘which you can read about above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 13
Organizing Effects of Sex Hormones

Distinction between the activating and organizing effects of hormone is
not absolute

= Hormones early in life can exert temporary effects
© During puberty, hormones can also induce long-lasting structural changes

 

It’s important to note that this distinction is not super clear-cut, and you can
read about two fringe cases above.

But generally speaking you can think of organizing effects as building up
structures that are capable of inciting activating effects under specific
circumstances.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 14
Sexual Differentiation:
External Genitalia

At first, the external genitals of
males and females look the
same

Differentiation depends mostly on
the level of testosterone during a
sensitive period (for both males
and females)

‘The human sensitive period for

genital formation occurs during
the first trimester of pregnancy

 

Let’s talk alittle more about the role of these hormones in anatomical sex
differentiation. Once the embryo develops a little more, sexual differentiation
starts to become much more pronounced. At first, genitalia look the same (note
‘the topmost image above). Differentiation of external genitalia occurs as a
function of testosterone in both males and females: high levels lead to male
genitalia, and low levels lead to female genitalia,

‘There's a sensitive period during which this occurs, which is in the first
‘trimester of pregnancy. Just as a reminder, a sensitive period is a window of
‘time during which a certain structure or behavior can develop, given the right
circumstances. If these circumstances have not been met by the time the
‘window closes, then that structure or behavior will not develop fully.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 15
Organizing Effects of Sex Hormones:
Androgens

Female rats exposed to testosterone during sensitive periods become
partly masculinized in anatomy and behavior

® Clitoris grows larger than normal

© Sexual behavior becomes masculinized

Ifa male rat lacks androgen receptors or is castrated, it develops female-

like anatomy and behavior

* Other external factors (drugs, exposure to medication, etc.) can interfere with
androgen response

 

‘Okay, let's talka little more about organizing effects.

Exposure to different sex hormones before during specific sensitive periods
‘can have interesting effects on sex differentiation, which you can read about
above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 16
Organizing Effects of Sex Hormones:
Estrogens

Estradiol and other estrogens do not modify male anatomy
© They do modify various internal structures, including the prostate gland

‘The absence of sex hormones generally leads to female-looking external
genitali

Females lacking estradiol during early life do not develop female-typical
sexual behaviors

 

‘On the other hand, we have the female hormone estradiol. This hormone and
‘other estrogens do not tend to modify external male anatomy, although they do
appear to have some effect on internal structures (see above).

Additionally, the complete absence of any sex hormone leads to female-
looking external genitalia; and, moreover, a complete lack of exposure to
estradiol during early life will lead to non-typical female sexual behaviors. So
estradiol (and testosterone) both play a pretty big role in anatomical sex
differentiation and sexual behavior.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 17
Sex Differences in the Hypothalamus:
Hormone Release

In addition to some cortical areas, males and females differ on average in
the pituitary gland, hypothalamus, parts of the spinal cord, and elsewhere

Parts of the female hypothalamus generate a cyclic pattern of hormone
release

‘The male hypothalamus releases hormones more steadily

 

So a few slides ago we mentioned (very briefly) that structural differences
exist in the cortices of males and females. There are also differences in other
areas of the brain, which you can read about above.

To add to the first point, differences in the pituitary and hypothalamus
influence which hormones are released and when.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 18
Sex Differences in the Brain
Hypothalamus: Alpha-Fetoprotein

‘Alpha-fetoprotein is found in the blood during early sensitive periods,
binds to estradiol, and prevents it from entering developing cells
© Females are not exposed to estradiol at this time

© For males, testosterone does not bind to alpha-fetoprotein and freely enters

the cell
«From there it gets converted to estradiol and exerts masculnizing effects

 

So jumping back to specific steroid hormones, how do they work to produce
different effects?

Firstly, there's a substance called alpha-fenoprotein which is present in the
blood very early in development, and it essentially binds to estradiol and
prevents it from entering developing cells.

Females are not exposed to estradiol while this is occurring. On the other
hand, males have a higher concentration of testosterone, and that is able to
freely enter developing cells. From there it gets converted into estradiol, and
this leads to masculinizing effects. t's really confusing and counterintuitive,
but I like it as an example of how complex and not-clear-cut this process of
sex differentiation is. Here testosterone leads to the development of male
‘characteristics, via conversion to estradiol.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 19
Sexual Differentiation of the
Hypothalamus

Hypothalamic Area Male-Female Difference En
‘Medial preoptic area | More dendritic spines and. Testosterone and estradiol
synapses in males increase production of
prostaglandin E2
Ventromedial nucleus | More widely branched | Estradiol activates PI3

dendrites in males kinase, which increases
slutamate release.
‘Arcuate nucleus and__| More dendritic spines and _| Estradiol increases GABA
nterovental synapsesin Females production, which ats on

periventricular nucleus astrocytes to decrease
‘dendritic ranching.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘This is a handy table looking at the effects of estradiol on different areas of the
brain in males and females. I'm not going to read it out to you, but you should
be familiar with it as we move forward with this lecture.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 20
Sex Differences in Childhood Behavior
Boys vs. girs

* Tpleally, many (though not all) boys play roughly

* Many girls (though not all) play cooperatively

+ Preferences tend tobe consistent overtime
Not all of this behavior appears to be learned

« It seems partially due to socialization, but also due to general preferences of
each sex

© Example: Baby monkeys also show the same preferences in play style, but toa
lesser extent

 

‘The release of steroid hormones ultimately effects not just physical sex
differences, but also some behavioral sex differences. The earliest
‘manifestation of this is in the types of play both sexes engage in ~ and this is
spontaneous play, meaning it doesn’t arise with any encouragement from

adults or any outward socialization. You can read about these different types of
play in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 21
Toy Choices by Male and Female
Monkeys

 

‘There are primate studies that support behavioral differences in play between
‘young males and females. This is data from a study that looked at juvenile
‘monkeys’ spontaneous play behavior when given certain types of toys.

When presented with novel toys ~ that is, toys that they've never seen before,
juvenile monkeys will play with what we'd consider to be “gendered” toys ~
‘boys would play with cars more than dolls, and girls would play with dolls
‘more than cars. The neutral toy here was a ball, which both monkeys showed
equal preference for.

And again, this was in the absence of socialization, which suggests that these
‘behaviors arise spontaneously.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 22
Sex Differences in Childhood Behavior:
Prenatal Hormones

Girls born to women with high testosterone levels while pregnant show a
slightly elevated preference for typical boys’ toys

Boys born to women with high phthalate (found in perfumes, food
packaging, etc.) levels while pregnant showed more interest in typical

girls’ toys
‘Toy preferences seem to be a result of both prenatal hormones and child-
rearing experiences

 

Researchers have also observed sex differences in behavior as a result of
‘prenatal exposure to different substances. You can read about several different
‘cases where this ean happen in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 23
Activating Effects of Sex Hormones

At any time in life, sex hormones exert activating effects to temporarily
‘modify behavior

Behavior can also influence hormone secretion

Oxytocin

© Important for reproductive behavior

« Stimulates uterine contractions during delivery and mammary glands in
releasing milk

 

Let's move on and talk a litle more about activating effects of sex hormones.
Remember, these are effects that can occur at any time in life and can
temporarily modify behavior. These effects can also influence the amount,
‘type, and timing of secretion of specific hormones,

‘One such example is a hormone called oxytocin, which is exereted at very
specific times. For example, it's incredibly important in reproductive behavior
~ and in females it helps do things like stimulate uterine contractions during
delivery and mammary glands in releasing milk. It also increases bonding to
infants in both males and females.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 24
Males: Sexual Arousal

Sex hormones bind to receptors in the hypothalamus, including the
ventromedial nucleus, the medial preoptic area (MPOA), and anterior
hypothalamus ~ influences different sensations/behaviors

Testosterone increases touch sensitivity in the penis

‘Testosterone triggers the release of dopamine by the MPOA and other
areas

 

In speaking about activating effects, let's zoom in and talk about how they
‘manifest in males and females. Generally speaking, sex hormones bind to
specific areas in the hypothalamus, which are listed in the first bullet point
above. Depending on when and who they're binding to, this can have different
effects in terms of sensation and behavior.

For example, you can read about the effects of testosterone and sexual arousal
above.

‘The release of dopamine in response to touch ultimately makes touch feel
more rewarding,

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 25
Males: Effects of Neurotransmitters

Dopamine stimulation of D, and D, receptors is associated with sexual
arousal
+ Facilitates erection of the penis and sexually receptive postures in females

Higher concentrations of dopamine stimulate D; receptors and lead to

orgasm

Neurotransmitter serotonin decreases sexual activity by blocking
dopamine release

 

Speaking to the last point on the previous slide, dopamine stimulation ~ and.
specifically that of D1 and DS receptors ~ is closely associated with sexual
arousal in both males and females. You can read some examples of how this,
effects behavior above.

Serotonin actually counters the effects of dopamine by essentially blocking its
release. This is often why antidepressants (specifically those that influence
serotonin) decrease sex drive as a side effect.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 26
Males: Testosterone Levels

Testosterone levels correlate positively with sexual arousal and the drive
to seek sexual partners

Married men or those in a committed relationship generally have lower
testosterone levels

« High testosterone levels result in greater than average desire to seek
additional sexual partners, even if in a committed relationship

 

‘Testosterone tends to increase sex drive, both in males and females. Males and
females tend to produce a baseline level of testosterone, and this can fluctuate
depending on things like age, health, or context. For example, men in a
‘committed relationship tend to have lower levels of testosterone. In contrast,
individuals with higher baseline levels of testosterone tend to be more likely to
seek extramarital partners.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 27
Males: Sexual Interest

Research on testosterone levels and sexual interest show direct
correlation
© More testosterone = more sexual arousal

Castration generally decreases sexual interest and activity

Low testosterone is not the typical reason for impotence
© Usual cause is impaired blood circulation

 

Testosterone has a direct, positive correlation with sexual interest (more
{testosterone equals higher sex drive). Castration ~ especially complete
‘castration that removes the testes - decreases both sexual interest and activity,
as there is no longer a strong signal to release testosterone.

However, somewhat unintuitively, lower testosterone levels are not the typical
reason for impotence (i... the ability to obtain or retain an erection). This is
typically due to impaired blood circulation, and is actually correlated with
obesity.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 28
Females: The Menstrual Cycle

In women, the hypothalamus and pituitary interact with the ovaries to
produce the menstrual cycle

‘The menstrual cycle
+ Periodic variation in hormones and fertility over the course of about 28 days

 

So we've talked about some of the effects that the release of different
hormones has on male behavior ~ now we'll look at how this influences
female behavior,

A good jumping off point for talking about females and hormones is the
‘menstrual cycle, which is a window of time during which hormones affect
ferility to varying degrees. On average this cycle repeats roughly every 28
days, although there is a son of variance among individual women,

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 29
All of women’s oocytes (= female gametes,
aka. eggs) are formed prenatally

Follicles = oocyte + surrounding support
cells

Beginning prenatally follicles begin to
develop at rate of ~1000/month

Peaks at around 18-22 weeks, with 4-5. mires
millon dormant fies 50 coOOH ds @,

Dormant follicles will die without the — =
presence of FSH (follicle stimulating iy

hhormone)/LH (luteinizing hormone)

© Atbirth, “1 milion follicles left

* By puberty, ~500,000 left

© At menopause, zero left

Your book provides a very quick example of this cycle, and I actually think it’s
a little confusing. So I'm going to break it down in a little more detail, with the
hopes that this will help you understand what I think isa bit ofa shallow
presentation in the book.

‘There are four primary hormones at play here > estradiol, progesterone, FSH,
and LH. To help you out, I've highlighted al ofthe relevant terms I'd like you
to know. When you're studying, I recommend that you ask yourself, “What is
the role of this hormone or this structure?”

‘This slide should provide you with some of the background information you
need. You should read through it, but don’t worry too much about the figure at
the right yet

 

30

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 30
Phases of the menstrual cycle.
Follicular Phase

SH and LH signals sent from the pituitary
‘land.
* Select one dominant folie

* Cause surrounding support cls to increase estradiol

sone reas of estoen 30 c0OS BG,

© Primes an LH surge that gers owltion (= rlease
eg tom oie >the eg then aves toutes)

+ Causes thang of uterine ning in preparation or
trolneaton of taste

 

‘There are four phases of the menstrual cycle cycle. This slide outlines the first
‘two phases, so you can read through that on your own,

but let me address the figure on the right, First, a side note: In section (A),
“gondadotropins” is just another term for “sex hormones.” Typically when you
see the suffix “-tropin” that indicates a hormone... and “gonad” refers to the
organs that produce sperm (testes) and eggs (ovaries). There you have it!

 

Section (A) indicates what the levels of FSH and LH are throughout the cycle.
And remember, these two hormones are being released fom the anterior
pituitary to the uterus. During the follicular phase these levels are relatively
low, but the exhibit a spike during the ovulation phase.

Section (B) gives you an idea of what happens to the egg during the cycle.
During the follicular phase, a specific follicle is selected. During the ovulation
phase, the follicle releases the egg into the uterus.

Section (C) describes what the levels of estradiol (indicated here as estrogen,
but you can think of them as the same for this diagram) and progesterone are
‘throughout the cycle. The spike in estradiol right at the ovulation phase is what
stimulates the follicle to release its egg.

31

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 31
Section (D) describes what's going on in the uterine lining during all ofthis. It begins
thickening during the follicular phase, but does most of its thickening during the
ovulation (and luteal) phases...

Now, if you look at the bottom of the figure, you'll see a timeline, That gives you a
rough idea of what's going on in each section (A-D)

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 32
Phases of the ovulation cycle
Luteal Phase

* After ovulation, remaining part ofthe folicle
‘turns into structure called corpus luteum
+ secretes progesterone (an estradiol) whichis
necessary for hosptable environment fr embry
+ A secretes hormanes which stop production of
FS, which n tur cause corpus teu to = rom

trophy unless ees ferted/mplanted, rer Sa,

Menstruation
© Ifthe egg has not been fertilized, corpus —
luteum will stop producing progesterone
+ Restarts production of SH/LM
* Cyl epeats|

You can read through the next two phases in the slide above.

‘The luteal phase is all about preparing the uterine environment for the
implantation ofa fertilized egg. The big player here, hormone-wise, is
progesterone, which provides a “hospitable environment” for the embryo by
‘thickening the uterine lining.

Ifan egg is not fertilized after a set amount of time, menstruation is triggered,
‘This is represented by a dip in progesterone, which causes the uterine lining to
shed. From there, the cycle repeats itself until menopause.

‘you'll note I deleted the slides from the previous lecture. I did this because
| think this explanation is alot more clear... but you're still welcome to use
those slides (and of course your book) to study this.

 

32

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 33
Interactions between the Pituitary Gland
and the Ovaries

 

‘This diagram shows the interactions between the anterior pituitary (up top)
and the ovaries (below) at different points of the menstrual cycle. This roughly
corresponds with the figure in the previous slides, so | won't go into too much,
detail here. One point l do want to highlight, though, is firstly that
progesterone is primarily released by the corpus luteum — which is why the
uterine lining will start to shed as the corpus luteum decays. Second, estradiol
is primarily released by the ovary, and helps trigger the release of the egg into
the uterus.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 34
Females: Pregnancy

Ifa woman is pregnant, estradiol and progesterone levels increase

gradually throughout pregnancy

«If not, levels of both decline, and uterine lining is cast off
(menstruation)

High levels of estradiol and progesterone produce heightened activity in
the serotonin receptor
© Causes nausea associated with pregnancy

 

‘The menstrual cycle occurs over the course of a female's lifetime, from
puberty to menopause. The default is for the uterine lining to shed, but what
happens when a fertilized egg is successfully implanted in the uterus? That i
‘hat happens when a woman becomes pregnant?

 

Ifa woman becomes pregnant, estradiol and progesterone levels rise steadily
until the child is born. Estradiol plays a big role in maintaining a healthy
environment for the fetus (increases blood the number of blood vessels,
facilitates nutrient transport, etc.), while progesterone leads to physical
changes in the mother’s body (transforms the shape of the uterus, loosens
muscles, ete:)

‘One side effect of the increase in hormone levels is pregnancy sickness, which
results from estradiol/progesterone causing fluctuations in the serotonin 3
receptor. It's beyond the scope of this class to explain why this reaction occurs,
but it gives rise to random bouts of nausea and/or vomiting during pregnancy.
‘There is a possible evolutionary function to this: avoiding foods that are
potentially harmful to the fetus, although I can say from experience there's a
lot of debate surrounding this argument,

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 35
Females: Birth Control Pills

irth control pills prevent pregnancy by interfering with the usual
feedback cycle between the ovaries and pituitary

© The combination-pill contains both estrogen and progesterone
© Prevents the surge of FSH and LH that would release an ovum, and.

Causes follicles to die instead of developing (FSH)
« Prevents ovulation (LH)
« Thickens the mucus of the cervie, which,
© Makes it more difficult for sperm to reach the egg
«Prevents egg from implanting in uterus

 

‘Nowadays we have the ability to prevent pregnancy. For now, this mainly
involves measures taken by females, and the most common form of this type
of birth control is birth control pills. You can read about how these work in the
slide above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 36
Females: The Periovulatory Period

Days of the cycle when fertility is highest
© Occurs during the middle of the menstrual cycle

Studies suggest that women’s sexual interest peaks at the periovulatory
period and influences behavior in many ways, generally without the
woman's conscious recognition of the effect.
© Show increased interest in flting,
“Lap dancers receive larger tips (yes, this isa real study! -> Miller, Tyber, &
Jordan 2007)
* Suggests males might also be unconsciously attuned to periovulatory period

 

Let’s zoom in now and talk about one very specific point in the menstrual
cycle, called the periovulatory period. This is the point at which women are
‘the most fertile: the egg is out ofthe follicle and the uterine lining is ready for
implantation,

AAs it turns out, women seem to behave differently during this period. I could
(and have!) given a whole lecture on tis topic, but we're only going to cover
itbriefly here

‘Women, for example, will not only flirt more during this period, but will also
‘wear more red and pink clothing (which men tend to find more attractive), and
there is some evidence suggesting that they're more attracted to men with
higher testosterone levels during this time.

 

‘There's also some evidence that men are able to pick up on when women are
ovulating. One of my favorite studies ever conducted (and mentioned in the
slide above, and also in a previous lecture) measured the amount in tips that
were given to lap dancers (who were not on birth control) during various
points in their menstrual cycles. They found that women were given

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 37
significantly higher tips when they were ovulating! Again, this suggests that men are
able to detect when women are ovulating, even though they do not give off any overt
‘signals of being in that period of the menstrual cycle. There are many theories as to
what's going on here, one of which has to do with different types of pheromones that,
are given off at different points of the eycle, which we mentioned in our lecture on the
chemical senses, There's a pretty hefty debate surrounding this topic, but that’s a
discussion for another class.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 38
Female-Initiated Sexual Activities as a Function of
Menstrual Cycle Phase

i
i
#
i
H
q
i
}
i

 

‘This graph speaks to my last point, about women’s behavioral changes during
‘the periovulatory period. The graph on the left depicts autosexual acts,
(masturbation/sexual fantasies), while the graph on the right depicts female-
initiated sexual activities with a male partner, The different-colored lines are
different forms of birth control.

Birth control pills (blue line) and so-called “invasive” methods of birth control
(e.g.,an UD or implant; green line) can cause hormone levels to fluctuate and
= as you can see inthe graph — influence different types of sexual behavior.
‘The birth control pill seems to have the greatest effect on sexual behavior, in
‘that women who take birth control pills are far less engaged in either
autosexval or initiated sexual activities when their estrogen levels are highest.
In contrast, women who are taking “non-invasive” methods of birth control
(.g,, condoms or diaphragms; redline) show the highest spike in initiated
heterosexual activity when ovulating

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 39
Effects of Sex Hormones on
Non-sexual Characteristics

Ability to recognize facial expressions of emotion
© Well-documented gender difference

Experiments:

© Women receiving testosterone injections became less accurate at
recognizing facial expressions of anger (van Honk & Schutter, 2007)

« Increased testosterone decreased women's ability to infer a person's
‘mood from watching their eyes (Olsson et al., 2016; van Honk et al,
2011)

 

It turns out that sex hormones can also influence non-sexual behaviors as well.
As an example, there is a well-documented difference in the ability to
recognize the facial expressions of different emotions; males seem to be, on
average, less good at this than females.

Several experiments (some of which are mentioned above) examined whether
‘women could be induced to exhibit male-like abilities in emotion-reading from
facial expressions. As it tums out, when injected with testosterone, women did
indeed become less capable at recognizing emotions.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 40
Stimuli to Measure People’s Ability to
Identify Emotion

 

Here's an example of the study run by van Honk and Schutter (2007)
‘mentioned in the previous slide. In this study, women were shown faces
displaying six different emotions: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and
surprise.

For each of the six emotions, researchers altered a single image to show a
range from 0% to 100% of the given emotion (the example above depicts
varying degrees of anger).

‘The researchers then compared women’s ability to detect these emotions at
different percentages when they were injected with either a placebo or a
‘testosterone solution. They found that the group of women injected with
testosterone needed much stronger facial cues of anger to detect it as such,
compared to the group that was injected with the placebo.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 41
Parental Behavior: Hormonal Changes

Hormonal changes prepare a female mammal to provide milk and to
prepare her to care for young

Prolactin
© Necessary for milk production

Enables mother to eat more than usual
« Responsible for some maternal behavior

Females change pattern of hormone receptors during pregnancy

 

Hormone changes also influence parental behavior. In female mammals,
fluctuations in specific hormones prepare them to provide milk and otherwise
care for their young.

‘Oxytocin plays a major role here (we talked earlier about how it stimulates
milk production), but so does another hormone called prolactin, which you can
read about above.

Besides secreting hormones like prolactin and oxytocin, female mammals also
become more sensitive to specific hormones during pregnancy. For example,
late in pregnancy the female's sensitivity to estradiol increases, and it does $0
especially in areas involved in parental behavior. These are listed in your book
= you do not have to memorize them, but knowing which areas are involved
will give you a fuller picture of what is happening during this process.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 42
Parental Behavior: Hormonal Changes
Vasopressin

+ Hormone synthesized by the hypothalamus

+ Secreted by the posterior pituitary gland

© Associated with social behavior in many species
+ Facilitates olfactory recognition

Mice (and humans) can adopt normal maternal behavior without the
hormonal changes of going through pregnancy

 

Another important hormone involved in parental behavior is vasopressin,
“which we talked about in our lecture on sleep. It has another function as well
> it appears to facilitate social behavior in many species, mainly by enabling
‘them to recognize one another via olfaction. This sense is much stronger in
‘other, non-human animals, but it's possible that we use olfaction to recognize
‘one another on a less-conscious level

‘Speaking to the last point on this slide, it seems like maternal behavior can
emerge even ifa female does not directly experience pregnancy. Your book
provides a lot of examples for this, and I recommend you review them.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 43
Parental Behavior:
Hormones and the Quality of Care

Hormones play initial role in quality of maternal care
«= Experience replaces hormonal influences as hormone levels decline

Correlation exists between father’s hormones and level of interaction with
their child

«Fathers with lower testosterone and higher prolactin levels spent more time
playing with and caring for child

 

‘The hormones involved in parental care (and maternal care in particular) are
high immediately after giving birth. It’s costly to produce a constant stream of
‘these hormones, though, and many of them decline after a short period of time.
This decline does not cause matemal care to decrease; rather, it seems that at a
certain point the mother has enough experience caring for her young that she
will continue to do so without the need for hormones to drive her behavior.

Hormones also appear to play a role in paternal care (you can read this in the
slide above)... but it’s important to note that this behavior is subject to cultural
differences. That is, itis observed less in cultures where fathers are not
expected to provide direct care to their children.

-------------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture 1 - Sex, Hormones, and Reproductive Behavior - Page 44
Questions for your discussion groups..

(Remember, you only have to answer one question to receive credit for
this week, and this week's participation is optional)

in example of an organizing effect that we discussed i
lecture? An activating effect?

2. Describe the process of sexual differentiation at the embryonic level
3. Describe one way in which sex hormones influence non-sexual behavior

 

‘That does it for the first part of this week's lecture! We have one last lecture to
finish up the quarter, on variations in sexual behavior. I'll see you there!