Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 0
Temperature Regulation

WEEK 9, LECTURE 1

 

Welcome back! Let's jump right into our topic for today ~ Intemal Regulation

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 1
This lecture series will cover...
‘Temperature regulation

‘Thirst

Hunger

 

‘This week's lectures are fairly simple, although we'll definitely go into the
detail behind each process. Here's what's on the agenda (see above).

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 2
Temperature Regulation
Temperature affects many aspects of behavior

‘Temperature regulation is vital to the normal functioning of many
behavioral processes

Homeostasis refers to temperature regulation and other biological

processes that keep certain body variables within a fixed range
= Some birds stand on one foot to keep the foot closer to their body warm
© Toucans’ large beaks radiate heat to keep their bodies from overheating.

 

Let's start with temperature regulation, which affects a wide variety of
behaviors and is actually really important with regards to other physiological
and behavioral processes.

‘Temperature and many other biological processes are regulated through
something called homeostasis, which is a process that keeps certain body
variables within a fixed range. This can be accomplished behaviorally ~ so, for
instance, some birds stand on one foot to keep warm ~ or physiologically ~ for
example, toucans have these really massive beaks that radiate heat and help
keep them from overheating.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 3
Homeostasis

Any biological process that keeps body variables within a fixed range
© Examples: temperature, levels of water, oxygen, glucose, calcium, protein, fat,
and acidity in the body

Set point: a single value that the body works to maintain

Negative feedback: processes that reduce discrepancies from the set

point

* e., Negative feedback brings any changes from the set point back up to the
set point

© Much of motivated behavior can be described as negative feedback

 

Homeostasis doesn’t just refer to temperature regulation ~ it can encompass
any biological process that keeps specific body variables within a fixed range.
‘Other examples are listed above.

‘Sometimes this range is so narrow that it’s actually justa single value. This is
referred to as a “set point”,

‘This set point can vary according to environmental changes and the like, and
so we need a process that helps us return to that point: this is known as
negative feedback. Your bones help store calcium, and if your body's calcium.
levels fall below their set point the body will borrow from that storage. If your
calcium levels are too high, some excess calcium is stored in the bones, while
the remainder is excreted. Both of these methods are examples of negative
feedback, which helps return your calcium levels to their set point.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 4
Allostasis

Refers to the adaptive way in which the body anticipates needs depending
on the situation
© Helps the body avoid errors instead of just correcting them

 

Homeostasis is a very reactive system, in that it reacts to changes in the body
‘or environment. Something changes and your body reacts ~ sometimes by
‘generating behavior ~ to counter that change.

‘There's also a process that's more proactive ~ it anticipates changes before
they occur and makes adjustments accordingly. This is called allostasis, and it
helps the body avoid making errors, rather than correcting for them after
they've already occurred. A fantastic example of allostasis would be the fight
‘or flight response ~ it triggers a number of physiological changes in your body
‘that help prepare it for vigorous activity. Both allostasis and homeostasis are
important for internal regulation ~ one isn't necessarily better than the other.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 5
Example:
Controlling Body Temperature
Temperature regulation is one ofthe body's top biological priorities

Maintaining temperature requires twice as much energy as all other
homeostatic activities combined

Basal metabolism describes the energy used to maintain a constant body
temperature while at rest

 

So let's tie that all back to temperature regulation. It’s one of the body's top
biological priorities, and it’s actually incredibly costly from an energetic
standpoint. As stated above, maintaining temperature requires twice as much
energy as all other homeostatic activities combined!

In order to maintain a constant temperature, our bodies rely on something
called basal metabolism, which is the amount of energy used to maintain a
constant temperature ar rest (“basal” means “base” or “floor”). The average
young adult burns around 2000-2600 kilocalories per day on this process
alone. This is largely accomplished by burning brown adipose cells (i.e, fat
cells), which release energy directly as heat,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 6
Controlling Body Temperature:
Ectothermic Species

Ectothermic (a.k.a., poikilothermic): occurs
when the body temperature matches that of
the environment

« Includes amphibians, reptiles, and most fish

+ Ectotherms lacks the internal, physiological
‘mechanisms of temperature regulation
“Temperature regulation is accomplished via
choosing locations in the environment
“Although known as “cold-blooded” organism is Soke seeing warm,
cold only if environments cold cmesenalsowe

 

Broadly speaking, there are two ways that organisms maintain a constant
temperature. The first type we'll talk about are ectothermic (or
“poikilothermic" ~ be happy you don't have to hear me stumble over this word
ina live lecture!) species, which depend on extemal sources for body heat
instead of generating it themselves. You can read more about ectothermic
species above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 7
Controlling Body Temperature:
Endothermic Species

Endothermic (a.k.a., homeothermic):
use of internal physiological
‘mechanisms to maintain an almost
constant body temperature

© Characteristic of mammals and birds

+ Requires energy and fuel

«Sweating and panting decrease
temperature

+ Increasing temperature is accomplished
va shivering, decreasing blood flow to.
‘the skin, and flffing out furto increase
insulation

 

See esc.ZUT

‘On the other hand, some species are endothermic (or “homeothermic,” which
js much easier to pronounce), meaning they use internal physiological
‘mechanisms to maintain a constant body temperature,

Most mammals and birds are endothermic. In contrast to ectothermic
processes, endothermic processes require more energy to produce. You can
read through some examples of endothermic processes above. I'd like you to
think about how each of these processes are generated internally (i.e, they
don’t require an organism to move to a warm or cold spot), and the fact that,
internal processes use energy.

Endothermic species do not rely solely on internal processes to regulate
temperature ~ they also use behavioral strategies. Examples include putting on
or taking off clothes or moving more when it’s cold and less when its hot.
‘These types of behavior help regulate temperature, and as a bonus are much
less energetically costly to perform,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 8
Surviving in Extreme Cold

Ectothermic animals
© Death will occur if body temperature
drops below freezing
«lee crystals form in cells and blood

«© Amphibians and reptiles burrow
underground to avoid the cold

© Some insects and fish stock blood with
antifreeze compounds in winter

+ Extraordinary blood-clottng ability quickly
repairs ruptured blood vessels,

 

Survival is at a high risk ifthe external temperature drops below freezing,
Humans and other mammals have internal processes to help cope, but what
about ectothermic animals? For many of them, the danger is in their blood
freezing, which would cause an expansion of blood vessels to the point of
bursting,

Ectotherms have evolved some really cool strategies to combat this, which you
can read about above.

‘The alligator shown above, for example, essentially goes into a state of
suspended animation ~ referred to formally as “brumation” ~ during the
‘winter. It does not engage in any bodily processes besides drinking and

breathing, and it moves very little during this time to conserve energy.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 9
The Advantages of Constant
High Body Temperature

‘Mammals evolved to have a constant temperature of ~37°C (98°F)
© Muscle activity benefits from being as warm as possible
«Readies muscles for vigorous activity

If warmer is better, why not have higher baseline temperatures?

© There are costs to having temperatures that are too high!
«© Requires even more energy

« Proteins in the body break their bonds and lose their useful properties at
higher temperatures

+ Reproductive cells require cooler temperatures

 

Mammals have a relatively high internal body temperature, compared to other
types of organisms. This has a particularly strong benefit: it keeps slow-twitch
‘muscles active, which keeps us from relying on short bursts of vigorous
activity from fast-twitch muscles, We can run away more easily than
ectothermic animals, even in cold temperatures.

However, maintaining a high internal body temperature also comes with
several costs, which you can read about above. As with many, many evolved
processes, there isa trade-off with having a high baseline body temperature.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 10
Brain Mechanisms:
POA/AH

Body temperature regulation is predominantly dependent upon areas in

the preoptic area/anterior hypothalamus (POA/AH)

The PONAH receives input from temperature receptors throughout the
ody

® Sends output tothe raphe nucleus (in the hindbrain), which controls
responses to heat/eold

« Heating the POA/AH leads to panting or sweating; cooling leads to shivering
= Tiss the primary are for contrlng sweating and shivercg

+ Also recelves input from the immune system => recelving Increased
Prostaglandins and Nstaminey and castes shivering, neseased metabolism
Bnd fever

 

So that was a bit of an introduction to different methods of temperature
regulation. Let's talk about the brain mechanism that actually control these
processes,

‘The main area involved here is a complex known as the POA/AH, which you
‘can read about above. You can see how it triggers internal process like
sweating or shivering in response to external changes in temperature. And, as
stated above, it can also regulate temperature based on signals from the
immune system ~ meaning it can control things like a fever response.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 11
Integration of Temperature Information
by the POA/AH

Temperature
receptors in sn

 

Here's a handy diagram of how this process plays out. Ifthe brain and skin
‘become too hot, the POA/AH sends signals that lead to sweating and other
‘methods of heat loss. Conversely, ifthe brain and skin become too cold, or if
the immune system indicates an infection, the POA/AH initiates shivering,
increased heart rate, decreased blood flow to the skin, and increased
metabolism via brown adipose tissue.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 12
Major Subdivisions of the Hypothalamus and
Pituitary Gland

 

‘The book provides you with a diagram of the hypothalamus and pituitary
mainly to provide you with some context as to where all of these structures are
located. You don’t need to memorize this diagram, but hopefully it'll help you
place these areas when you're thinking about them. I've circled the relevant
areas to help you place them,

I'd also like you to think about the broader functions of the hypothalamus as
‘we discuss these processes. Remember, the hypothalamus is a structure mainly

in charge of signaling the release of specific hormones to different areas of the
body.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 13
Fever

Reflects an increased body temperature from its set point

Directed by the hypothalamus

Benefits:

* Certain bacteria grow less vigorously

«© Immune system works more vigorously

A fever of above 39°C (103"F) does the body more harm than good
« Fevers above 41°C (109°F) ae life-threatening

 

As I mentioned a few slides ago, the POA/AH complex can initiate a fever in
response to signals from the immune system. You can read about it above.

I'd like to highlight that fevers are actually beneficial ~ they improve the
functioning of the immune system while simultaneously inhibiting the growth
of bacteria. However, this area of the brain will continue to raise body
‘temperature as part of an immune response, and after a certain point a fever
will actually do more harm than good. This is, I think, especially relevant to
the circumstances we're all facing today ~ one of the major guidelines for
Covid-19 is that you seek medical help if you have a fever of 104 degrees or
more, At this point, the fever is actually working against you, and medical
intervention can help fight off the disease and bring the fever down to a more
‘manageable level

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 1 - Temperature Regulation - Page 14
Questions for your discussion groups..

1. What is one physiological structure and one behavior that we as
humans possess which help us regulate our body temperature?

‘What is one benefit to having a high internal body temperature? What
is one cost?

 

‘Okay, short lecture to kick it off this week! Here are a couple of questions for
‘your discussion group. I'll see you in the next lecture, on thirst!