Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 0
Rhythms of Waking and

Sleeping

WEEK 8, LECTURE 7

 

Welcome back everyone! Sorry to deliver another written lecture this week.
Fun fact, I think in getting sick I seriously damaged my vocal cords at some
point. I'm working on resting up, so my hope is that at least the last two
lectures will be recorded again, But for now, you'll have to work with my
notes. I hope these are clear enough ~ please let me know if they aren’t, as this
ymewhat of a new format for me.

 

In any case! This week's lecture is (I think) really interesting! We'll be talking
about different aspects of sleep.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 1
This lecture series will cover...
Rhythms of waking and sleeping

Stages of sleep and brain mechanisms involved
Sleep > REM and dreaming

Sleep disorders

 

‘This is generally what we'll be covering in our lecture series this week. We'll
start by talking about how sleep is regulated, and from there we'll discuss the
different brain mechanisms involved in sleep. We'll have a really interesting
discussion (or, written note-reading session) about the function of sleep and
‘dreaming in particular, and we'll finish by talking about some cases where
sleep can be disordered. So, let's get started.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 2
Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping

Early psychologists believed that cycles of wakefulness and sleep were
dependent upon external stimuli

Curt Richter in 1922 proposed that the body generates its own cycles of
activity and inactivity

 

So carly on, psychologists believed that external stimuli ~ things like light and
temperature ~ were the sofe determinants of sleep and wakefulness. Being
exposed to bright light makes you more awake, being in darkness makes you
more sleepy, etc. ete.

It wasn’t until about 1922 that a researcher named Curt Richter proposed that
the body regulates its own cycles of activity and inactivity (he referred to it as
the “biological clock"). We do still respond to things like light and
temperature, but these external stimuli serve to signal or modulate these
internal processes. Your book uses an example of pulling an all-nighter ~
something I'm sure we've all been through at some point in our lives. When
you pull an all-nighter, you are forcing yourself to be awake. And yet, if you
think back to your most recent all-nighter, you might remember that you were
‘more tired as the night went on, but as the day started you gradually became
‘more alter. This ean happen even if you're in a small room with near-constant
exposure to artificial light (say, studying for an exam), which means that
something inside you is generating these feclings of tiredness and alertness,
independent of how much or how little light you're being exposed to.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 3
Endogenous Circannual and Circadian
Rhythms

Some animals generate endogenous circannual rhythms, internal mechanisms
that operate on an annual or yearly cycle

“Example: birds’ migratory patterns; animals storing food forthe winter

All animals produce endogenous circadian rhythms, internal mechanisms that

‘operate on an approximately 24-hour cycle
* Sleep cycle

+ Frequency of eating and drinking

* Body temperature

«Secretion of hormones

+ Urination

Sensitivity to drugs

 

What are these internal systems? Well, it can vary from species to species.
‘Some animals have what are called circannual rhythms, which you ean read
about above.

ALL animals have endogenous (i... internally generated) circadian rhythms,
‘which again you can read about above.

‘These rhythms determine not just sleep but also other regulatory processes,
‘many (although not all) of which are listed above. Each one of these is
described in more detail in your book, which I recommend you read through,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 4
Setting and Resetting the Biological Clock

The function of the circadian rhythm is to keep our internal workings in phase
with the outside world

The human circadian clock generates a rhythm slightly longer than 24 hours
when it has no external cue to setit,
«Resetting our circadian rhythms is sometimes necessary

Zeitgeber: German meaning “time giver, refers to stimuli that reset the

circadian rhythm

* Examples: sunlight, tides, exercise, meals, arousal of any kind, meals, temperature of
environment, and so on,

+ Depression, iritablty, and impaired job performance are effects of using something
other than sunlight asa zeitgeber

 

Why do we have these internal cycles? It seems like the function of these is to
keep us in syne with the outside world. The reasoning for this is actually
somewhat circular (this is my own opinion), but as we'll find out later in this
series, it’s not entirely clear why we sleep in the first place. So it seems like, at
the very least, we have these internal cycles, and they try very hard to align
with cycles of day and night in the outside world. They are actually fairly
malleable, and your book has some interesting examples of when these cycles
can be shifted.

 

And in fact, our circadian rhythms don’t line up exactly with a 24-hour cycle.
‘Our rhythms are actually slightly longer than that, which means that every
once in awhile we need to shift or adjust them to line back up. Sometimes
completely resetting these rhythms is necessary, like when you travel to a
completely different time zone.

‘There's this German term called Zeitgeber, or “time giver”, which refers to
any type of stimuli that can reset your circadian rhythms. There are a bunch of
examples listed above (again, your book goes into much more detail about
these). Now again, these are external factors which can alter or reset your
circadian rhythm. The point is that it’s not completely determined externally.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 5
We have an internal cycle that exists in the absence of these factors, but these factors
can alter that rhythm, Let’s go over some specific examples over the next few slides...

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 6
Jet Lag

Refers to the disruption of the circadian rhythms due to crossing time
zones

© Stems from a mismatch of the internal circadian clock and external time
«Sleepiness during the day, sleeplessness at night, and impaired concentration

‘Traveling west “phase-delays” our circadian rhythms

Traveling east “phase-advances” our circadian rhythms

 

‘One fairly common example of a disruption in circadian rhythm is jet lag,
which occurs when we cross time zones. These can be really minor, if we go
somewhere that’s an hour ahead... or they can be really extreme, if we go
somewhere that’s 12 or more hours ahead (or behind). At first, we tend to stick
to the rhythm from the place we originated from ~ the rhythm we're used to.
But as we receive cues that daytime and night time are occurring at different
parts of our cycle than we're used to, this ean cause shifts in tiredness and
alertness.

It’s generally less disruptive to travel west. We “phase-delay” our rhythms; the
time at the place we arrive at is slightly earlier than the one we left, and so we
end up staying awake later and sleeping later until we adjust.

It’s more disruptive to travel east In this case, we “phase-advance” our
rhythms, meaning we arrive in a place that has a later time than we're used to.
If we leave in the morning and arrive at night, we're likely not going to be
sleepy until our internal cycle tells us it’s “nighttime,” which is still based on
where we originated from. In this case, we have to essentially force ourselves
to adhere to the new rhythm — by sleeping when it’s dark and waking when it’s
light — even if our internal cycles are telling us otherwise.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 7
Shift Work

For people who work odd hours, sleep duration depends on when they go
tosleep

Working at night does not reliably change the circadian rhythm
Even after long periods of working at night, people can still feel grogay, sleep

poorly during the day, and body temperature peaks while sleeping instead of
while working
People adjust best to night work if they sleep in a very dark room during
the day and work under very bright lights at night

 

Another example is shift work ~ and specifically, people who work irregular
shifts (eg. night shifts). For these individuals, the amount of time they sleep
‘depends on when they go to sleep. If they go to sleep in the morning, for
example, they tend to only sleep fora few hours before waking up
automatically.

‘You might think that someone who consistently works, say, a night shift would
eventually shift their circadian rhythm to match an awake-at-night-asleep-
<during-the-day cycle. But this actually isn’t the case, and you can read about
some of the problems these individuals have above.

‘The best solution to this ~ atleast for people who work night shifts ~ is to
sleep in a very dark room during the day and work under very bright lights at
night — essentially simulating “normal” day/night cycles,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 8
Morning People and Evening People

Cycles can differ between people and lead
to different patterns of wakefulness and
alertness

Change as a function of age...

© Young children tend to be morning people
«= Adolescents are often night people

‘As an adult, it partially depends upon
genetics

 

‘There are also individual differences in people’s sleep cycles. Some people are
“night owls” and some people are “morning larks” (Which is a term I wasn’t
aware of until I read this textbook... I've just been calling them “morning
people”...), and some people are neither. Generally speaking, young children
tend to be morning people and adolescents tend to be night people. Personally,
I'ma night person, but I've noticed that's changed as I've gotten older. Now
I'm much more comfortable waking up early, whereas 5 or 6 years ago I would
have been incredibly upset if | had to wake up before Sam.

 

‘This graph is based on a study that looked at the variance of individuals’
sleep/wake cycles in terms of both gender and age. They asked individuals to
record the “middle” of their sleep on days on which they had no obligations
(middle” here means finding the midpoint between the time they fell asleep
and the time they woke up). You can see a few things by looking at the graph:
first, that there is a lot of individual variance (by looking at the dots). There
also appears to be a gender difference, in which males report sleeping much
later than females on average. And there's also an age difference ~ both of the
sexes recorded here report a peak in sleep time around the age of 20, and that
steadily declines (and the gender difference becomes smaller) as age increases.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 9
Mechanisms of the Biological Clock

‘Mechanisms of the circadian rhythms
© The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)

«© Genes that produce certain proteins

© Melatonin levels

 

So those are some examples of different factors that can shift one’s circadian

rhythms. Let’s move on and talk about the physiological components that
underlie this mechanism,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 10
The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus (SCN)

‘The main control center of the
circadian rhythms of sleep and
‘temperature

* Located above the optic chiasm

and part of the hypothalamus

Damage to the SCN results in less
consistent body rhythms that are
no longer synchronized to
environmental patterns of light
and dark

 

We'll start with an area called the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which you
‘can read about above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 11
The SCN and the Circadian Rhythm

Generates circadian rhythms in a genetically controlled, unlearned

manner

« Single cell extracted from the SCN and raised in tissue culture continues to
produce action potential in a rhythmic pattern

Various cells communicate with each other to sharpen the circadian
rhythm,

 

‘The SCN is genetically controlled, meaning its behavior is completely
unlearned. Interestingly, if you remove cells from the SCN and keep them
alive in a tissue culture, they'll continue to fire in response to the body's
circadian rhythm, The same thing will happen if you remove SCN cells from
‘one organism and transplant them to another whose SCN has been completely
removed: the recipient will take on the circadian rhythms of the donor
‘organism! So this area is incredibly genetically specified.

‘This effect can be produced by a single SCN cell, although having more SCN
cells attuned to one cycle will sharpen or enhance the rhythm,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 12
The SCN and the Retinohypothalamic
Path

Light resets the SCN via a small branch of the
optic nerve called the retinohypothalamic
path

© Travels directly from the retina to the SCN

‘The retinohypothalamic path comes from a
special population of ganglion cells that have
their own photopigment called melanopsin
© The cells respond directly to light and do not
require any input from the rods or cones

 

‘Since the SCN is one of the primary determinants of the circadian rhythm, it is,
relatively sensitive to light. The SCN is connected to a branch of the optic
nerve called the retinohypothalamic pathway. This pathway contains a special
type of ganglion cell that does not respond to photoreceptors; rather it
responds directly to light via a photopigment called melanopsin (recall from
our lecture on methodology that “opsins” are chemicals that respond
especially well to light),

‘These cells respond to gradual changes in light, which helps the SCN
determine the time of day, and subsequently help regulate
tiredness/wakefulness. Interestingly, these cells respond especially strongly to
short-wavelength (i, blue) light, which is one of the reasons why staring at
your phone right before you fall asleep will actually result in lower quality
sleep (or a general delay in falling asleep),

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 13
The Biochemistry of the Circadian
Rhythm

Two types of genes are responsible for generating the circadian rhythm.
«Period: produce proteins called PER
«Timeless: produce proteins called TIM

PER and TIM proteins increase the activity of certain kinds of neurons in

the SCN that regulate sleep and waking
= Mutations in the PER gene result in odd circadian rhythms or decreased
alertness if deprived of a good night's sleep

 

So to sum up what we've talked about so far: the retinohypothalamie pathway
‘transmits light information to the SCN, which helps the SCN determine the
time of day. From there, the SCN regulates circadian rhythms. Now the
‘question is, how does it actually do that?

‘There are two types of genes that are responsible for generating these rhythms:
period (which produces proteins called PER) and timeless (which produces
proteins called TIM)

‘These two proteins interact to regulate sleep and wakefulness by activating
certain neurons in the SCN, which you can read more about above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 14
Interaction of mRNA with PER and TIM
Proteins

 

How do these proteins work, exactly? Your book gives an example from fruit
flies, but the principle is generally the same for humans.

‘There are two processes at work here: 1) mRNA coding for the production of
PER and TIM (indicated by the black line) and 2) the actual concentration of
PER and TIM (indicated by the red line). You can see from looking at the image
above that coding comes first, and concentration is slightly delayed [it takes
‘time for these proteins to be produced, after al).

MRNA begins to code for the production of PER and TIM early in the morning,
‘when their concentrations are at their lowest. mRNA will continue to ramp up
its coding throughout the day, and the result is that by the evening, the actual
concentration of PER and TIM is at its highest. At this point, when PER and
TIM are at their peak, they'll send a signal back to mRNA to decrease.
production. mRNA concentrations decrease, and over the course of the
evening, PER and TIM concentrations slowly decrease as well. By morning,
PER and TIM concentrations are at their lowest, and the cycle starts back up
again

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 15
‘Now, | realize | haven't really told you what PER and TIM do with regards to circadian
rhythms. Part of the reason is that it’s beyond the scope of this class, but another is
because, like | mentioned, PER and TIM are present in fruit flies, and are not present
in the same way in humans. We possess genes similar to PER and TIM, and their
functioning i... complicated. Your book provides several examples of how mutations
(or malfunctions in these proteins can lead to disordered sleep. This is a great way to
study how these proteins function ~ if one of them malfunctions and causes, say,
delays in sleep, we know that that protein must be involved in the part of the
circadian chythm that makes you sleepy as the day ends.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 16
Melatonin

‘The SON regulates waking and sleeping by
controling activity levels nother areas of the
bain
"The SN repuates the pineal lan, an endocrine
and located posterior tothe alamus

“The pineal gland secretes melatonin, ahormone
Thatincreaterseepness

Melatonin secretion usually begins twoto three
hours before bedtime
* Melatonin feeds backto reset he ological dock
tvouph is efets on ceptors inthe SEN
+ Melatonin taken inthe afteroon can phase
Seep ais

 

‘The SCN also regulates an area of the brain known as the pineal gland ~ and
specifically, it leads to the release of a hormone called melatonin, which you
‘can read about above,

Melatonin can actually be used as an effective sleep aid ~ and it’s sold over the
‘counter (and now in gummy form). It's most effective when taken a few hours
‘before bedtime (you can also take it in the afternoon, but this might cause you
to become sleepy closer to sunset).

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 1 - Rhythms of Waking and Sleeping - Page 17
Questions for your discussion group.

1. How does the SCN work with PER, TIM, and Melatonin to regulate
circadian rhythms?

 

‘Okay, that does it for this first lecture! I have just one question for you for this
lecture, because it was fairly short. Our next lecture will look at sleep cycles
and the brain mechanisms that regulate them. See you then!