Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 0
Movement Disorders

WEEK 7, LECTURE 3

 

Welcome back! This is your last lecture series for this week. This lecture series
isa little shorter, and I’m actually kind of happy about that, because this really
isn't my preferred medium of getting the information out to you. Ifit has to be
‘this way, at least it’s for one of the shorter series, right?

 

In any case ~ in our ast two lectures, we've been talking about movement
under neurotypical conditions. This lecture will discuss cases in which
‘movement can be impaired,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 1
Movement Disorders

Brain disorders, such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington’s disease not
only affect movement, but also impair mood, memory, and cognition

 

We'll mainly be focusing on two diseases: Parkinson's and Huntington's. Both
of these are primarily considered movement disorders, but they effect much
‘more than the ability to move: they also have effects on mood and cognition.
‘There tends to be alot of variance in cognitive and mood symptoms, but I
should also note that these are both incredibly debilitating diseases, so mood
disorder is an unfortunately natural companion to the other symptoms.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 2
Parkinson’s Disease

‘Amovement disorder characterized by
‘muscle tremors, rigidity, slow
movements, and difficulty initiating
physical and mental activity

© Associated with an impairment in
Initiating spontaneous movement in the
absence of stimuli to guide the action

Symptoms also include depression,
‘memory and reasoning deficits, loss of
olfaction, and other cognitive deficits

 

Let’s start with Parkinson's disease. You can read about the general
symptomatology above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 3
Causes of Parkinson's Disease

Caused by gradual and progressive death of neurons, especially in the
substantia nigra
© Substantia nigra usually sends dopamine-releasing axons to the caudate
rhucleus and putamen

Loss of dopamine leads to less stimulation of the motor cortex and slower
onset of movements

 

Parkinson’s appears to be caused by the gradual, progressive death of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.

‘The substantia nigra is another part of the basal ganglia, and it typically sends
dopamine and GABA to the striatum, which enables the initiation of
‘movements ~ and specifically learned movements.

In Parkinson’s disease, the dopamine-releasing neurons in the substantia nigra
start to die off. The loss of dopamine leads to less stimulation of the motor
cortex, and slower onset of movements as a consequence

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 4
Comparison of Normal and Parkinson’s
Connections Within the Brain

 

‘This diagram highlights how Parkinson's disease affects normal brain
functioning in the basal ganglia. Excitatory paths are shown in green, and
inhibitory pathways are in red. The “normal” brain is on the left, and the one
‘with Parkinson's is on the right.

  

you focus on the right image, you can see that there is decreased excitation
from the substantia nigra. This leads to decreased inhibition from the
striatum, and THAT leads to increased inhibition from the globus pallidus. The
net result is a decrease in excitation, which leads to a decrease in motor
functioning. This is another one of the many ”X inhibits Y which excites 2”
pathways. | do not need you to know this in detail, but ! would like you to take
2 moment and compare this to the functioning of the direct and indirect
pathways we discussed in our last lecture. The best way to wrap your head
around these types of pathways is with lots of examples. So again, I'm not
‘going to ask you about these pathways in detail, but the best way to gain a
deeper understanding of them is to spend a litte time going over examples
(and of course I’m here if you have any questions)

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 5
Causes of Parkinson's Disease

Studies suggest early-onset Parkinson's has a genetic link

However, genetic factors are only a small factor of late onset Parkinson’s,
disease (after 50)
Also implicated:
© Environmental influences such as exposure to toxins
* Insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides
© Traumatic head injury

 

‘When it comes to determining the causes of Parkinson's Disease... it's
complicated. No one has been able to determine why neurons in the substantia
nigra begin to die off.

‘There are many studies out there suggesting that there's some kind of genetic
predisposition for it, although no one has been able to pinpoint what this is as
of yet,

Moreover, as with many disorders with a possible genetic component, it seems
like genes play much more of a role in early-onset Parkinson's. For those who
start to show symptoms after age 50 (j.. late-onset Parkinson’), it gets even
‘more complicated. There's some research suggesting that individuals exposed
‘to chemicals like pesticides are more likely to get it later in life. The same
goes for people who have suffered a traumatic head injury at some point in
their life. Again, though, it seems like a number of different factors lead to its
onset. At this point, there is unfortunately no clear picture of the cause of this,
disorder.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 6
Causes of Parkinson's Disease

Studies suggest early-onset Parkinson's has a genetic link

However, genetic factors are only a small factor of late onset Parkinson’s
disease (after 50)

Also implicated:

Environmental influences such as exposure to toxins
“Traumatic head injury
Damaged mitochondria of cells seems to be common to most factors that
increase the risk of Parkinson's disease

igarette smoking and coffee drinking are related to a decreased chance
of developing Parkinson's disease

 

Regardless, it seems like these causes all lead to one common outcome:
damaged mitochondria of cells in the substantia nigra

Also, weirdly ~ cigarette smoking and coffee drinking are related to a
decreased risk of developing Parkinson's. And this is a pretty robust effect ~
even extends to those who have persistently been exposed to second-hand
smoke! But it’s really unclear what itis about smoking (and coffee drinking)
‘that protects people against this disease. Researchers believe there might be
some compound in nicotine that prevents damage, but the jury is stil out on
this one. I've done a little bit of research preparing for this lecture (Parkinson's
is not my area of specialty, although I think it’s fascinating) ~ and there really
isn'ta lot of research on this topic. At least not yet!

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 7
Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease

The drug L-dopa is the primary

treatment for Parkinson's and is a Parkinson's Disease Drugs
precursor to dopamine that easily = —

crosses the blood-brain barrier

+ Often ineffective, especially for those ~,
in the late stages of the disease 4

= Does not prevent the continued loss
of neurons

© Can enter other brain cells and
produce unpleasant side effects

 

So how is Parkinson’s treated? Right now, the most effective medication is
something called L-dopa, which is a precursor to dopamine that can easily
‘cross the blood-brain barter.

However, it’s by no means a cure, and also has several drawbacks, which you
‘can read about above,

‘Now, you don’t need to memorize anything about this chart, this is just here to
show how L-dopa can cross the blood-brain barrier, be synthesized into
dopamine, and the get released into the synapse.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 8
Other Possible Treatments for
Parkinson’s Disease

Drugs that directly stimulate dopamine receptors
Implanting electrodes to stimulate areas deep in the brain
Experimental strategies such as:

© Transplanting brain tissue of aborted fetuses

« Implantation of stem cells that are programmed to produce large
quantities of L-dopa

 

‘The most promising alternative candidates for Parkinson's treatments are any
drug that directly stimulates dopamine receptors (rather than providing a
precursor for dopamine synthesis)

‘There are also other strategies in the works, such as implanting electrodes to
stimulate dopamine release in the basal ganglia, or things like transplanting the
intact brain tissue of aborted fetuses to replace the damaged tissue in the
substantia nigra, or directly implanting stem cells that have been pre-
programmed to produce lange quantities of L-dopa.

All of these are in the works, but none has been proven effective as of yet. We
are nowhere near a cure for this disease, unfortunately.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 9
Huntington’s Disease

‘Aneurological disorder characterized by various motor symptoms
© Affects 1 in 10,000 in the United States
+ Usually onset occurs between age 30:50
Associated with gradual and extensive brain damage especially n the basal
ganglia but also in the cerebral cortex
Initial motor symptoms include arm jerks and facial twitches

Motors symptoms progress to tremors and writhing that affect the persons
walking, speech, and other voluntary movernents
Also associated with various psychological disorders:
* Depression, memory impairment, anxiety hallucinations/delusions, poor judgment,
alcoholism, drug abuse, sexual disorders

 

And on that note, le’s move on to our next topic. The next disease we're going
to talk about is one that is quite rare but also quite devastating. Huntington's
disease is characterized by a wide range of motor symptoms, which you can
read about in detail above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 10
A Normal Brain vs. a Brain
w/Huntington’s Disease

 

‘The brain section on the left is a normal brain, and the one on the right is one
‘that was affected by Huntington's disease. The angle of cut through the
‘normal brain makes the ventricle look larger in this photo than it actually is.
but even so, you can see how much larger the ventricle it isin the patient with
Huntington's disease. The ventricles expand because of the loss of neurons,
and CSF fills in the missing areas. You can also see that there is substantial
neural tissue loss in the patient with Huntington's.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 11
Heredity and Presymptomatic Testing

Presymptomatic tests can identify with high accuracy who will develop
Huntington’s disease
© Controlled by an autosomal dominant gene on chromosome #4

The higher the number of consecutive repeats of the combination C-A-
G, the more certain and earlier the person is to develop the disease

» Ethical dilemma > there is now a test for the disease, but would you
want to know if you had it?

 

Most disorders don't have a single genetic cause, but Huntington's is unique in
that it does. The gene for Huntington’s is located on chromosome 4, and it's
actually a dominant gene ~ so if you have it, it’s much more likely that the
disease will manifest (as opposed to you being a carrier fori).

 

   

‘This gene codes for a specific sequence of nucleotides: C-A-G. And it actually
codes for repeats of this sequence, basically telling this sequence to repeat
over and over again, The more consecutive C-A-G repeats of this sequence
one has, the more likely one is to develop the disease. A higher number of C-
A-G repeats also indicates an earlier onset of the disease.

Because so much is known about the genetic underpinnings of Huntington's,
individuals who think they might be at risk can actually take a test for it even
before they start showing symptoms. But the fact that testing exists raises a
kind of scary ethical dilemma for people, Would you want to know if you had
it? It can be an incredibly difficult choice for individuals who know they're at
risk,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 12
Example: Base Pair Repeats and Onset of
Huntington’s Disease

umber ofc repeat

 

So this graph is based on a study that looked at the number of CAG repeats
(on the x-axis) and the age of onset of Huntington's (on the y-axis). You can
see that, first and foremost, as the number of repeats increases, the age of
onset decreases (and vice versa). Notice also that there isa lot more
variability (indicated by the black lines above and below each marking on the
‘graph) for age of onset in people with fewer C-A-G repeats. This tells us that
C-A-G repeats are a good predictor of age of onset, but there are other factors
at play here as well.

In any case, the take-home from this is that the more C-A-G repeats one has,
‘the more likely one is to have the disorder, and the more likely itis to manifest
earlier in life (around age 40 or so).

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 13
C-A-G Repeats and Huntington’s Disease

Identification of the gene for Huntington's disease led to the discovery of

the protein that codes it (huntingtin)

© Mutant form impairs neurons in the brain; future drug therapy may address
hhuntingtin

Avariety of neurological diseases are related to C-A-G repeats in genes...

 

[read through slide first]

‘CAG repeats are actually not limited to Huntington's disease: they're also
found in a number of other neurological diseases.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 14
C-A-G Repeats and Other Diseases

 

Here's another graph, which speaks to this last point. So, the x-axis here
shows the number of C-A-G repeats, and the y-axis shows the average age at
onset of different neurological diseases, including Huntington’s. The key point
is that for each disease, the greater the number of C-A-G repeats, the earlier
‘the onset of symptoms,

So C-A-G repeats are a good way of assessing the potential manifestation of
‘many neurological disorders, not just Huntington's.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 3 - Movement Disorders - Page 15
Questions for your discussion groups..
1. What is the (general) cause of Parkinson's Disease?
2. What is the (general) cause of Huntington's Disease?

 

‘That does it for this week's lectures! Here are some last discussion questions to
round out the week.

‘Thank you all for working with me this week. Hopefully by next week I'll be
back at it again with my scratchy voice.