Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 0
Stages of Sleep and

Brain Mechanisms

WEEK 8, LECTURE 2

 

Inher, welt abou. wel what ete ts: the stages ofslep
and the brain mechani 's

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 1
Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms
Sleep isa specialized state evolved to serve particular functions
Research Question: What are the mechanisms for producing sleep?

 

Sleep appears to have evolved to serve specific functions. We'll talk about
‘what some of those functions may be in our next lecture, but for now we can
ask a different question ~ and this is a question you can ask about any
mechanism (biological or otherwise) that serves a specific function ~ mainly,
‘what mechanisms regulate it?

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 2
Sleep

Sleep is a state that the brain actively
produces
© Characterized by a moderate
decrease in brain activity and

decreased response to stimuli

Sleep differs from...
© Coma, vegetative state, minimally
conscious state, and brain death

 

Fora more technical definition of sleep, read the slide above, Note that sleep
is different from other non-conscious states, in terms of behavior, response to
‘outside stimuli, and brain activity.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 3
Other (Non-Sleep) Interruptions of
Consciousness

Coma: extended period of unconsciousness characterized by low brain activity,
‘that remains fairly steady

© Person shows itl response to stimuli

‘Vegetative state: person alternates between periods of sleep and moderate
arousal but no awareness of surrounding

* Some autonomic arousal to painful stimulus

+ No purposeful actvty/response to speech

Minimally conscious state: one stage higher than a vegetative state marked by
‘occasional brief periods of purposeful action and limited speech comprehension

Brain death: no sign of brain activity and no response to any stimulus

 

‘There are many other types of non-conscious states, and you can read about
‘them in more detail above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 4
Stages of Sleep: EEG

The electroencephalograph (EEG)

allowed researchers to discover that

there are various stages of sleep

© Allows researchers to compare brain
activity at different times during sleep

A polysomnograph is a combination of
EEG and eye-movement records

 

 

 

 

 

‘There are four (or five, if you consider
REM) stages of sleep...

 

 

‘One of the best ways to study sleep is by doing something called a sleep study,
in which you essentially hook someone up to an EEG and record their brain
activity through a whole night's sleep. Often participants are also hooked up to
1 device called a polysomnograph, which records both brain activity and eye
‘movements. It produces a readout that looks something like the image here —
ceach row represents the readout from a different electrode, so you can not only
tell when different wavelengths are occurring, but also where they're
‘occurring.

In any case, using this methodology, researchers have identified four (or five)
primary stages of sleep. We'll review them over the next few slides.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 5
Relaxation and Stage 1 Sleep

Beta waves are present when
one is awake and alert Awake syhmalhapemditer

Alpha waves are present when

cone begins a state of relaxation Stage 1 amp AMY

Stage 1 sleep is when sleep has

just begun

©The EEG is dominated by
Irregular, jagged, and low-
voltage waves

» Brain activity begins to decline
(lower than alpha waves, but
higher than other sleep stages)

 

You can read about each stage in the slides above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 6
Stage 2 Sleep

Stage 2 sleep is characterized by

the presence of: Awake matealdientiation
« Sleep spindles: 12- to 14-Hz waves

during a burst that lasts at least Stage 2. WKAR ner

half a second

+ Kecomplex: a sharp wave
associated with temporary
inhibition of neuronal firing

 

[read through slide first]

Sleep spindles appear to results from interactions between the thalamus and
the cortex, and increase in number after learning a new skill or knowledge set
= they appear to be related to the consolidation of new memories. K-
complexes are associated with a temporary inhibition of neural firing, which
‘might play a role in downregulating the body's response to external stimuli
‘during sleep. K-complexes have also been implicated in memory
‘consolidation.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 7
Slow Wave Sleep: Stage 3 and Stage 4
Stage 3 and stage 4 together
constitute slow wave sleep (SWS) Awake — aqsmaidyay tain

and is characterized by:

© EEG recording of slow, large

amplitude wave Stage 3
«© Slowing of heart rate, breathing,

rate, and brain activity

«Highly synchronized neuronal Stage 4
activity

 

[read through slide first]

"Nowadays these two stages are often referred to as “slow wave sleep”
‘together, rather than as two separate stages. The general difference between
‘the two (and you can see this in the image above) is that waves become slower
as one moves from stage 3 to stage 4,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 8
REM or Paradoxical Sleep

Rapid eye movernent sleep (REM)
describes periods characterized by Awake
rapid eye movements during sleep
“Also know as paradoxical sleep: deep
sleep in some ways, but ight in other
ways
EEG waves are irregular, low-
voltage, and fast
Postural muscles of the body are
more relaxed than other stages,
which prevents motor movement

santana
ea

 

Finally we have REM, or “paradoxical” sleep, which you can read about

above.

‘The brain is also more active than stages 3 and 4 ~ this is the stage ofsleep in

\which dreaming occurs.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 9
Polysomnograph
Records of Different

Sleep Stages...

 

Putting it all together, this is a polysomnograph of all of the different stages of
sleep.

For each image, the top (blue) line isthe EEG from one electrode on the scalp
‘The middle (red) line is a record of eye movements. The bottom (black) line is
a time marker, indicating 1-second units. You can see, for example, that there
isa lot more activity in stage 1 sleep, and this gradually decreases (and
becomes more synchronized) as the brain progresses through stage 2 into
stage 3 and 4 sleep. You can also nate the sleep spindles and k-complexes in
stage 2 sleep, and in increase in eye movements in REM sleep.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 10
NREM and REM Cycles

Stages other than REM are referred to as non-REM sleep (NREM)

When people fall asleep, they progress through stages 1,2, 3, and 4 in sequential order
© Alter about an hour, the person begins to cycle back through the stages from stage 4
‘to stages 3 and 2 and then REM
«The sequence repeats with each cycle lasting approximately 90 minutes

Stages 3 and 4 sleep predominate early in the night
© Length of stage decreases as the night progresses
REM sleep is predominant later at night

© Length increases as the night progresses

REM is strongly associated with dreaming, but people also report dreaming in other
stages of sleep

 

A stages besides REM sleep (i. stages 1-4) ae collectively referred to as
“non-REM (NREM)” sleep.

Above, you can read about how humans progress from stage | through REM
sleep over the course of a sleep period. It is not a linear progression; rather, it
fluctuates in a cycle that lasts approximately 90 minutes.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 11
Typical Sequences »

of Sleep Stages

 

This isa polysomnograph readout from a single person, over the course of
three separate nights, nd you can see how long this person spent in each
stage throughout the night. “A” here indicates that the person was awake, and
each number corresponds to its respective sleep stage (hopefully “REM” is
obvious here). The red line atthe bottom shows the person's body
movements throughout each night; you can see that there are definite
periods of litle tono movement, and these occur mostly during slow-wave
sleep. Also note that slow-wave sleep is more prevalent early on, while REM
becomes more prevalent towards the end ofthe sleep cycle.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 12
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and
Arousal: The Reticular Formation

Various brain mechanisms are associated with wakefulness and arousal

‘The reticular formation is
a part of the midbrain
that extends from the
‘medulla to the forebrain
and is responsible for
arousal

 

So those are the stages of sleep in a nutshell. Let's move on now and talk
about the flipside of sleep: wakefulness and arousal. And we'll start by talking
about the reticular formation, which is an area that lies between the medulla to
the forebrain,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 13
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and
Arousal: The Pontomesencephalon

The pontomesencephalon, a part of the reticular formation, also

contributes to cortical arousal

© Axons extend to the hypothalamus, thalamus, and basal forebrain,
which release acetylcholine, glutamate, or dopamine

« Produces exitatory effects to widespread areas ofthe cortex
« Stimulation of the pontomesencephalon awakens sleeping individuals
and increases alertness in those already awake

© Axons also release GABA, which inhibits behavior and helps promote
slow wave sleep

 

‘The reticular formation generally contributes to arousal, and it has sub-
‘components that appear to be specialized for this function as well. One of
‘these is the pontomesencephalon, which you can read about above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 14
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and
Arousal: The Locus Coeruleus

The locus coeruleus

a small structure in the pons whose axons release
norepinephrine to arouse various areas of the cortex and increase
wakefulness

» Usually dormant while asleep, but releases powerful bursts of impulses

in response to events (especially those that increase emotional arousal)
© Releases norepinephrine to many different areas of the cortex

+ Increases “gain” > increases activity of most active neurons and
decreases activity of least active neurons

« Results in enhanced attention to important information and enhanced encoding of

 

Another area is the locus coeruleus, which again you can read about above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 15
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and
Arousal: The Hypothalamus

The hypothalamus contains neurons that release histamine to produce
widespread excitatory effects throughout the brain
» Antihistamines produce sleepiness

‘The hypothalamus also contains pathways which promote

wakefulness...

 

Finally there is the hypothalamus (which is nor part of the reticular formation).
As you know at this point, the hypothalamus controls a number of different
‘behaviors ~ many of them are regulatory, and many involve the release of
hormones. One of its many functions is to release histamine, which (among
other functions) promotes arousal in different areas of the brain

In addition to the production of histamine, the hypothalamus also contains
pathways that are specialized to promote wakefulness.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 16
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and
Arousal: Orexin

The lateral and posterior nuclei of the hypothalamus releases orexin

* Orexin s a peptide neurotransmitter and is sometimes also called
hhypocretin

» Orexin is needed to stay awake, rather than to wake up

«© Released by cells into the basal forebrain to stimulate neurons
responsible for wakefulness and arousal

* Side note: The basal forebrain isan area just anterior and dorsal to the
hypothalamus

 

‘One such pathway involves the release of a neurotransmitter called orexin (or
hypocretin), which you can read about above (sorry for the lack of notes here ~
‘these areas and pathways are fairly straightforward).

‘One point Id like to highlight, though, is that orexin does not initiate arousal —
it maintains it.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 17
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and
Arousal: GABA and Acetylcholine

Cells of the basal forebrain release the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA
© Inhibition provided by GABA is essential for sleep

GABA is also important for.

© Decreasing temperature and metabolic rate
© Decreasing the stimulation of neurons

Other axons from the basal forebrain release acetylcholine, which is
excitatory and increases arousal

 

‘There are two other neurotransmitters at play here: GABA and acetylcholine.

GABA is generally inhibitory, and so its main function is to strategically
inhibit certain brain areas according to one's circadian rhythms (and other
extemal factors), which promotes sleepiness. GABA helps downregulate
‘metabolic rate and temperature, and generally decreases the stimulation of
both nerves and neurons. It also decreases one’s ability to respond to outside
stimuli by hyperpolarizing neurons in the thalamus. The general effect of
GABA is to decrease communications between different brain areas.

(On the flipside is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which is generally
excitatory and increases arousal in areas it’s released to.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 18
Brain Mechanisms of Wakefulness and Arousal

Green arrows = excitatory
connections

Red arrows

connections

 

‘This is a diagram of the different pathways involved in wakefulness and
sleepiness. As the slide says, green indicates excitatory pathways (mainly
acetylcholinergic) while red indicates inhibitory (mainly GABAergic) ones.
You can see that the excitatory pathway passes through the reticular formation
(via the pontomesencephalon) and the locus coeruleus, and both pathways pass
‘through the hypothalamus on their way to the rest ofthe cerebral cortex.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 19
Brain Structures for Arousal and Sleep

Increase conte rus

 

Norepineptine

Increases formation storage
uring wakeess: suppresses
REM sleep

 

asst Forebrin
(Gxctatory cots)

Aestycline

Exetes thalamus and coreg
Increases fearing atlenton; sits
sleep rom NREM to REM

 

Basi Forebran
(nhibitory Ces)

nibs thalamus nd cortex

 

Hypothalmus sans)

erase rosa

 

Hypothalamus pat)

Maintains wakeunese

 

 

Desai ape and Pons

 

 

ters REM leo

 

 

ewcies we dated
theses

 

We've talked about most of the areas involved in sleep and arousal, and this is
Just a handy chart for you to use as a study aid, There are some areas we
haven't discussed (I'm looking at you, dorsal raphae and pons), and so you'll
‘only be responsible for the areas we've discussed here. This does inelude the
basal forebrain, so please be mindful of that.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 20
Brain Activity in REM Sleep

During REM sleep.

© Activity increases in the pons and the limbic system

« Activity decreases inthe primary visual cortex, the motor cortex, and the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex

REM sleep is also associated with a distinctive pattern of high-amplitude

electrical potentials known as PGO waves

= Waves of neural activity are detected fist in the pons (), then in the lateral,
‘geniculate ofthe hypothalamus (6), and then the occipital cortex (0)

REM deprivation results in a high density of PGO waves during uninterrupted
sleep

 

LLet’s finish up by talking about brain activity in REM sleep ~ not just different
brain waves, but what is happening in other areas of the brain. REM sleep is
associated with increases in some areas and decreases in others, as well as a
distinctive pattern of activity called “PGO waves” ~ you can read more about
all of this above,

PGO waves themselves are associated with dreaming ~ and specifically with.
‘the more “visual” aspects of it (hence the activation of the occipital cortex).
‘Their function may be to help consolidate memories, which is one of the
proposed functions of sleep.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 21
Brain Activity in REM Sleep

Celis in the pons send messages to the spinal cord, which inhibits motor neurons
that control the body's large muscles
* Prevents motor movement during REM sleep

REM is also regulated by serotonin and acetylcholine

© Drugs that stimulate acetylcholine receptors quickly move people to REM
* Serotonin interrupts REM

 

You're actually paralyzed during REM sleep, and this is because of a specific
pathway that leads from the pons tothe spinal cord, The result isan inhibition
‘of motor neurons in the periphery, which prevents you from moving during
sleep. This has a lot of functional utility, as it prevents you from harming
‘yourself atthe very least, falling out of bed) while you're in arguably the
most active stage of sleep (ie, dreaming).

Lastly, other neurotransmitters can affect the quality and duration of REM
sleep. Acetylcholine, for example, can move a person into REM sleep faster,
‘while serotonin and norepinephrine can interrupt REM sleep.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 2- Stages of Sleep and Brain Mechanisms - Page 22
Questions for your discussion groups...

4. Pick one brain structure or chemical involved in arousal. How does it
contribute to states of arousal?

2. Name three factors that differentiate REM sleep from nREM sleep,

 

‘Okay, that does it for this lecture! Apologies that there was less commentary
for this one ~ I've found that the information on sleep cycles is incredibly
straightforward. If you don't feel the same way ~ if you have lingering
‘questions ~ please feel free to reach out to me or Sierra, ether via lecture chat,
the class forum, or e-mail. I'll see you in the next lecture, which is on the
function of sleep!