Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 0
Sleep Disorders

WEEK 8, LECTURE 4

 

‘Okay, let's finish up our last lecture topic for today: sleep disorders.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 1
Sleep Disorders

Insomnia: A sleep disorder associated with inadequate sleep

© Caused by a number of factors, including noise, stress, pain, diet, and
medication

© Can also be the result of disorders such as epilepsy, Parkinson's disease,

depression, anxiety or other conditions

© Dependence on sleeping pills or alcohol and shifts in the circadian rhythms
can also result in insomnia

 

‘One of the more common disorders is insomnia, which is a disorder in which

individuals either cannot fall asleep, or cannot stay asleep. You can read more
about it above.

Basically, it can be caused by a wide range of factors: external, lifestyle
‘changes, or other disorders or diseases.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 2
Sleep Disorders as a Result of Phase Delay

Phase delay > trouble
falling asleep

Phase advance > trouble
staying asleep

 

As I said in the previous slide, insomnia can be due to either not being able to
fall asleep or not being able to stay asleep. Ifthe underlying issue is one of a
disturbed circadian rhythm, then there are two ways that this could play out

‘The top of the diagram here is what a normal circadian pattem would look
like, in terms of body temperature. Notice that it typically peaks during the
day, and is at its lowest at night.

Ifyou have trouble falling asleep, your rhythm may be delayed. You can see
‘that in the second part of the diagram here. Notice that the dip in temperature
doesn’t start to occur until well after a person tries to fall asleep

On the flipside, if you have trouble staying asleep, this could be due to an
advance in your rhythm. You can see that at the very bottom of the diagram,
‘where body temperature starts increasing more before the sleep period ends.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 3
Sleep Apnea
{Asleep disorder characterized by the inability to breathe while sleeping
for a prolonged period of time

© Consequences: sleepiness during the day, impaired attention,
depression, and sometimes heart problems

= Causes: genetics, hormones, old age, obesity, and deterioration of the
brain mechanisms that control breathing

» Effects: cognitive impairment may result

 

Another common sleep disorder is sleep apnea, which is characterized by
breathing issues ~ mainly the cessation of breathing ~ while sleeping. This can
‘occur several times over the course of one sleep period.

‘This disorder is often associated with obesity, but there are many other causes,
‘which you can read about above. If left untreated it can result in eventual
‘cognitive impairment,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 4
Medical Options to Improve Sleep Apnea

 

This is something called a continuous positive airway pressure (or CPAP)
machine ~> Basically, you wear a mask while you're sleeping, and the mask
fits over your nose and delivers air at a fixed pressure at a level strong enough
‘to keep the breathing passages open. This individual is hooked up to a bunch.
of other monitoring devices — the CPAP machine itselfs just the device that
fits over the nose. These are actually now used as a common home treatment
for sleep apnea.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 5
Narcolepsy

Asleep disorder characterized by frequent periods of sleepiness
© Attacks of sleepiness during the day

* Gradual or sudden attack of sleepiness

+ Occasional catapleny > muscle weakness triggered by strong emotions
« Sleep paralysis > inability to move while falling asleep or waking up

+ Hypnagogic hallucinations > dreamlike experiences

Seems to run in families, although no gene has been identified

Caused by lack of hypothalamic cells that produce and release orexin

Primary treatment is with stimulant drugs (e., Ritalin), which increase
wakefulness by enhancing dopamine and norepinephrine activity

 

Another slightly less common disorder is narcolepsy, which is kind of like the
‘opposite of insomnia, Basically, it's characterized by frequent periods of
intense sleepiness. These periods are often referred to as “attacks”, and
sometimes individuals with narcolepsy will experience cataplexy, or a sudden
‘weakening of the muscles. You can read more about this disorder above.

‘The cause of this disorder seems to be a lack of orexin, which you'll recall is a
neurotransmitter that induces arousal. Stimulant drugs which help release
dopamine and norepinephrine (two other stimulant-ish neurotransmitters)
seem to help treat the disorder.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 6
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder

The repeated involuntary movement of the legs and sometimes the arms

while sleeping
© Legs kick once every 20-30 seconds for periods of minutes to hours

© Usually occurs during NREM sleep

 

Periodic limb movement disorder, which you can read about above, is less
‘common but incredibly disruptive to both the person who has it and anyone
‘who happens to be sleeping next to that person. It can result in disrupted sleep,
even though the person typically sleeps through these episodes.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 7
REM Behavior Disorder

Associated with vigorous movement during REM sleep
= Usually associated with acting out dreams

Research suggest that inadequate GABA and other inhibitory
reurotransmitters may be responsible

 

‘There is also a disorder called REM behavior disorder in which individuals act
‘out their dreams. As you can imagine, this can be highly disruptive, depending
‘on the type of dream a person is having.

GABA - and specifically a lack thereof might be the underlying cause of this
disorder. Recall that when in REM sleep, GABA down-regulates the
functioning of many brain areas, and also helps to inhibit motor control. A lack
‘of GABA during this stage of sleep would enable a person to move around
while dreaming,

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 8
Night Terrors and Sleepwalking

ht terrors are experiences of intense anxiety from which a person awakens
screaming in terror
© Usually occurs in NREM sleep

“Sleepwalking” runs in families, mostly occurs in young children, and occurs

‘mostly in stage 3 or 4 sleep
© Not associated with dreaming
Itis not dangerous to wake a sleepwalker

A condition similar to sleepwalking is sexsomnia: engaging in sexual behavior
while asleep
© Can pose a threat to romances and marriages

 

Lastly, we have two similar but slightly different disorders: night terrors and
sleepwalking. You can read about both of these above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 4- Sleep Disorders - Page 9
Question for your discussion group...

4. Pick one sleep disorder and describe it in detall. Draw information from
the textbook, as well as the lecture.

 

‘Okay, that does it for this week! Like I said before, I'm really trying to
‘conserve my voice, so I'm hoping I'll be back and talking at you for next
‘week's topic on internal regulation, See you all them!