Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 0
Brain Mechanisms of

Movement

WEEK 7, LECTURE 2

 

‘Okay everyone, this is lecture 2 for this series. In our last lecture we talked
about how neurons connect to muscles, and how those neurons induce muscle
contractions and reflexive behaviors. Now we're going to get into the more
detailed aspects of movement: mainly, the different brain areas that control
different types of movement. So let's get started! (writing this out, I realize I
say that alot ~ sorry!)

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 1
Brain Mechanisms of Movement

Understanding how the brain
controls movement offers hope
for spinal cord damage or limb
amputations

 

It’s really important to understand how the brain controls movement. First of
all, because it's good to know how it’s supposed to function under normal
circumstances. Second of all, it's important because it can help us develop new
technologies to help people with movement disorders, like people with spinal
cord damage or limb amputations. Prosthetics that are controlled by brain
impulses, like the arm in this image for example, have become more and more
refined over the last few years due to this line of research. And it all starts with
understanding how the brain initiates and controls movement.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 2
The Cerebral Cortex

The primary motor cortex is located
in the precentral gyrus in the frontal
lobe

Axons from the precentral gyrus

connect to the brainstem and the
spinal cord, which generate impulses
that control the muscles

 

‘The first area we'll discuss is the primary motor cortex, which is located in the
precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe, This area has a direct connection to the
brainstem and spinal cord, and this network together helps generate the
impulses that control muscle movement.

Other areas lke the premotor cortex and supplementary motor cortex, are
also involved in motion. These areas in particular are activated during the
planning of movements. We'll talk more about these areas later — this is just
an example.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 3
The Cerebral Cortex

Other areas of the cerebral cortex are also involved in complex
movements.

«Also involved in thinking about verbs related to movement, imagining
‘movernents, and remembering movements

kt

Complex movement (more voluntary) = "Non complex movements (more involuntary =

‘ang wing et. ‘seeing couphine cine.

 

‘The primary motor cortex is the main area for motor control, but other areas of
the cerebral cortex are also involved in generating more complex movements,

Complex movements are movements that are more voluntary (although again,
all movement is a combination of both) ~ things like writing or talking.

‘This is in contrast to non-complex movements, which tend to have less
involvement of the cerebral cortex. These are things that are more involuntary,
like sneezing or coughing.

‘The cerebral cortex is also involved in movement-related thoughts, like
imagining or remembering movements ~ or even just thinking about verbs
related to movement. So the cerebral cortex can simulate movement, even
when no overt movement is occurring! This can be especially helpful for
planning out sequences of movement.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 4
Muscle Control from the Primary Cortex

Different paths from the primary
‘motor cortex, basal ganglia, etc.
send signals to the medulla and.
spinal cord

Signals from the medulla and
spinal cord initiate muscle
‘movements in the periphery

 

isa diagram of all of the relevant areas and pathways involved in different
types of motor movement. Broadly, different paths from areas like the
primary motor cortex, basal ganglia, and other cortical areas, send signals to
‘the medulla and spinal cord. Signals from the medulla and spinal cord then
initiate muscle movements.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 5
Planning a Movement

Specific areas of the primary motor cortex are responsible for control of specific
areas of the opposite side of the body
© Some overlap does exist

‘The primary motor cortex is active when people intend a movement

«The primary motor cortex “orders” an outcome

Other areas near the primary motor cortex also contribute to movement
Posterior parietal cortex > keeps track of the sition of the body relative to the
world
© Damage to this area causes dificult in coordinating visual stimul with movement

 

So let's talk about the planning of movements. While movements themselves
can be voluntary or involuntary, the planning of movements is largely
unconscious. The planning of movements is controlled by specific areas of the
primary motor cortex, although some overlap exists. And like many aspects of
brain and behavior, this is a contralateral process.

So here's how it works: the primary motor cortex activates when you intend to
initiate a movement, at which point it “orders” an outcome, which will begin
to execute no matter which position your body is in. Other areas near the
primary motor cortex also help coordinate this movement, which you should
read about in the slide above,

People with damage to the posterior parietal area have issues with finding
‘objects in space, even though they can accurately verbally describe them. They
also tend to bump into things when walking. So this is an area that provides
some of the visual feedback needed to successfully move around in the world
And this makes sense, too, when you think back to the dorsal stream of visual,
processing and its function, which is also located in the parietal lobe.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 6
The Primary Somatosensory vs. Primary
Motor Cortex

 

‘This diagram is very often shown when talking about both movement and
sensation, and that's because the somatosensory cortex (on the left) and the
primary motor cortex (on the right) are located adjacent to one another!

So the motor area responsible for moving a certain body part is actually
aligned with the somatosensory area responsible for feeling that body part.

Communication between sensing and moving is therefore essential for
movement.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 7
Other Areas for Planning a Movement

Premotor cortex
© Active during preparation for
movement

«© Receives information about a target ©,

=
+ Integrates information about

position and posture of the body >

organizes the direction of the

‘movement in space

 

Let's talk about some other areas involved in movement planning. First we
have the premotor cortex, which is active during preparation for movement.
You can read more about it in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 8
Other Areas for Planning a Movement

Supplementary motor cortex
© Organizes rapid sequence of
‘movernents in a specific order;
inhibitory if necessary

«Active seconds before the
‘movement

© Active following an error in
‘movernent so you can inhibit the
Incorrect movement the next time

 

‘The supplementary motor cortex is also involved... this area helps organize
rapid sequences of movement (e.g., throwing a ball, dancing, etc.) into a
specific order.

‘This area can be inhibitory when, say, you need to change up a habitual action,
‘or after you make an error in movement (it'll help correct for that the next time

you try it.

You can read more about this area in the slide above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 9
Other Areas for Planning a Movement

Prefrontal cortex

© Necessary for you to consider the
probable outcomes of a movement
© Active during a delay before movement

© Stores sensory information relative toa
movement

 

Finally, the prefrontal cortex is also involved in planning movements. The
prefrontal cortex is an area associated with what we often like to call “higher
cognitive functions” ~ things like planning, working memory, and inhibitory
control. These functions generally apply to motor movement as well, as, for

example, this area helps you simulate the probable outcomes of a movement.

In terms of activation, this area activates during the delay between when
‘movement is intended and when it's initiated, It also stores sensory
information relative to a movement, which helps provide feedback as to
whether that movement was successful oF not.

People with damage to the prefrontal cortex often do really weird things like
shower with their clothes on, And actually for most of us, the prefrontal cortex
isnot active during sleep, and because of that the actions you take in dreams
resemble those of people with prefrontal cortex damage.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 10
Inhibition of Movements

Antisaccade task + inhibits a voluntary saccade (i.e., an eye movement

from one target to another)

“In this task, participants are asked to look in the opposite direction as a stimulus
«Eg, if something is presented on the right side, look towards the left side, and vice

Look left Look right

So those are the areas involved in the initiation of movements, but what about
when movements need to be inhibited? One way to study this is with
something called an antisaccade task, which is a task that inhibits saccades.
Recall from our lecture on vision that saccades are rapid eye movements that
you can make either voluntarily or involuntarily (your book places heavy
emphasis on the “voluntary” aspect, but saccades can also be involuntary),

In any case, these tasks are used to measure the parts of the brain that are
activated when a movement needs to be inhibited. You can read about how
these tasks are generally implemented above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 11
Inhibition of Movements
‘Antisaccade task > inhibits a voluntary saccade (i.e., an eye movement
from one target to another)

Performing this task well requires sustained activity in parts of the
prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia before seeing the moving stimulus

Ability to perform this task matures through adolescence

 

So, performing this task well appears to require sustained activity in parts of
the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia before seeing the moving stimulus.
Why before? Because the brain needs time to stop the action and replace it
with something else.

Performance on this task tends to be very low for children, but it gets better
and matures through adolescence, as the prefrontal cortex develops. It also
decreases in old age, as the prefrontal cortex tends to lose volume as we age.
‘The ability to inhibit movements is tied closely to the prefrontal cortex, which
isan area that controls our ability to inhibit initial responses.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 12
Mirror Neurons

Neurons that are active during both
preparation of a movement and while
‘watching someone else perform the
same or similar movement
© May be important for understanding,
identifying, and imitating other people
© May be involved in social behaviors
(ecg, imitating facial expressions)
© Unknown whether they cause or result
from social behavior

 

‘This is kind of a side bar, but humans (and other animals) appear to have this
really interesting ability to coordinate our movements with the movements of
others ~ and this seems to be somewhat involuntary. And researchers have
found that a special type of neuron ~ called a mirror neuron ~ is activated
when mimicking the movements of others. These neurons appear to be active
both while watching someone perform a movement, and while performing that
movement ourselves, which suggests that we have a built-in propensity to
imitate other people. This ability has been heavily implicated in social
behaviors and social leaning, but we don't really know if they are the cause or
result of social behavior.

Speaking to the last point, the question is whether we're born with these
neurons, which can help facilitate social learning, or whether we develop and
strengthen these neurons and their connections as we gain more experience
with imitation, in which case they’re a result of social learning, not the cause.
‘The jury is stil out, and this is a fairly new area of study, but it's really
interesting as it suggests neurological underpinnings for our ability to learn
from others.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 13
Connections from the Brain to
the Spinal Cord

‘Messages from the brain must reach the medulla and spinal cord to
control the muscles

Corticospinal tracts are paths from the cerebral cortex to the spinal cord

Two such tracts:
© Lateral corticospinal tract
© Medial corticospinal tract

 

‘Okay, let's talk litle more about the pathway of motor information. So far
‘we've talked about how the brain begins to initiate movement and how it can
inhibit movement ~ let's talk about what happens once the brain definitively
“decides” to execute a movement. So, very generally, once a “decision” is
‘made, these messages are sent to the medulla and the spinal cord, and from the
spinal cord they'll be sent to their requisite areas in the periphery.

‘These signals move along special tracts called corticospinal tracts... and there
are two of these tracts, which are labeled above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 14
Lateral Corticospinal Tract

set of axons from the primary motor cortex and
surrounding areas > red nucleus > the spinal
cord
* Red nucleus: a midbrain area with output mainly to
the arm muscles
© Controls movement in peripheral areas (hands and
feet)
‘Axons extend from one side of the brain to the
‘opposite side of the spinal cord, and control
‘opposite side of the body

 

[read through slide first]

‘This area is also known as the pyramidal tract, because the tract crosses to the
contralateral side of the body in these bulges in the medulla called pyramids.
‘This is the area labelled decussation of pyramids. Decussation essentially
indicates an area of crossover.

‘This is actually a pretty detailed drawing, and while it’s hard to read here, you
‘can zoom in and get a closer look at the different components involved (or
loosely related to) this tract. Hopefully i'll give you a better idea of how these
areas all work together.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 15
Medial/Anterior
Corticospinal Tract

A set of axons from many parts of the cortex
* Reticular formation, midbrain tectum, vestibular
nucleus, et.

© Vestibular nucleus isa brain area that receives
information from the vestibular system

The medial tract controls the muscles of the
neck, shoulders, and trunk
« Responsible for bilateral movements like

walking, turning, bending, standing up, and
down

 

‘The other tract is the medial or anterior corticospinal tract, and you should
read through the slide to learn more about it.

‘The medial/anterior tract is responsible for bilateral movements, which are
‘movements that require coordination of both sides of the body ~ things like
‘walking or standing up. Because this tract controls movements that require
‘coordination of both sides of the body, axons in this tract go to both sides of
‘the spinal cord, rather than just to the contralateral side. You can’t really make
it out on this diagram (unless you zoom in, which I recommend), but Ill give
‘you clearer image on the next slide.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 16
The Lateral and Medial Corticospinal Tracts

Lateral Tract Medial/Anterior Tract
For a summary se: nins//wnuyoutvbe con/watchv= Malina,

 

Here's a comparison of the two tracts. The lateral tract is on the left, and you
can see how it's much more tightly concentrated and contralaterally
organized, right? It goes directly from the right side of the cortex, down
‘through the pyramids of the medulla, and then to the oppasite side of the
spinal cord,

 

In contrast, the medial/anterior tract on the image on the right is more spread
‘out, and once it leaves the reticular formation it innervates (i.e., connects) to
both sides ofthe spinal cord.

If you'd like a summary of these two tracts, 've included a 2-minute
neuroscience video for you at the bottom of the slide here. It goes into a little
‘more detail than | did, and so just to remind you you're only responsible for
‘the information in my lectures, not in these videos, unless | say otherwise.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 17
The Touch Path and the Lateral Corticospinal Tract

 

Just to provide one more,
of the touch tract, which is indicated in blue, to the lateral corticospinal tract,
\which is indicated in red. Both paths cross in the medulla, meaning both are
contralateralized. Notice also that touch information arrives at brain areas
that are also responsible for motor control. This again highlights the close
relationship between sensation and movement — we need to be able to get,
sensory feedback from the environment in order to successfully navigate
‘through the world around us.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 18
Disorders of the Spinal Cord

Damage to mata eronsor eons he
solar

rays | malty for sclatary moment in part ofthe body

 

raapegs | les Despite beak of seston rome ema,
Smunton ote ental roduc msm)

os senston and vn muse contin bth | Ga tvaugh esl cordial ea)

semanas rego or corte mae

os of snaton nd vor made convlinthe | Cathlva though hep coror aamage

eral oe he et orf ie {Sere hemnhere ol theceral corte

Snearedsenator andmusclecontolin hes | Dome the doi rox of spl cord

fnveregonncingbowe ober corral | om ete Sage ahs

oiler

‘Aca ough spa cardia the onc
ron er tower

 

 

 

 

Pa.

 

Unknown, raed ent mutations in same

 

 

 

 

 

 

As you might have seen in the video (and even if you haven’t seen it yet),
‘there are lots of things that can go wrong due to damage to the spinal cord.
‘This is another one of those tables that I do not need you to memorize, but it's
here if you're interested in some of the different types of injuries that ean
‘occur that we don’t have time to touch on in this class.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 19
The Cerebellum

A structure inthe brain often associated

with balance and coordination

* More neurons in the cerebellum than inal
ther brain areas combined

Important forthe establishment of new
‘motor programs that allow the execution
of a sequence of actions as a whole (e.,
tasks that require timing)

Damage to the cerebellum causes trouble
with rapid movements requiring
aim/timing
* Bxamples: lapping hands, speaking,
writing, ete

 

‘Okay, so let's move on and talk about some of the other major areas involved
in the actual execution of movement, We'll start with the cerebellum, which is
the brain structure most commonly associated with balance and coordination,
And, fun fact ~ this area is jam-packed with neurons. It has more neurons than
in all other brain areas combined! So there's a lot going on here.

‘This area is hugely important in executing sequences of movement ~
especially those that require precise timing, like catching a ball. And so it
follows that damaging this area will cause trouble with movements that require
coordination ~ things like clapping, speaking, or writing (or catching a ball)
will be impaired,

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 20
The Cerebellum and Functions Other
than Movements
Responds to sensory information even in the absence of movement

Responds strongly to violations of sensory information
© Example: reaching to touch something and not feeling itor feeling
something when you don’t expect to feel it

Also critical for certain aspects of attention, such as the ability to shift
attention and attend to visual stimuli

 

‘The cerebellum is often primarily attributed to movement, but it also responds
{to sensory information in the absence of movement. You can read some
examples in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 21
Cellular Organization of the Cerebellum

‘The cerebellum receives input from the spinal cord, from each of the sensory
systems and the cerebral cortex, and sends it to the cerebellar cortex

‘The cerebellar cortex is the surface of the cerebellum.
Cerebellar cortex neurons are arranged in precise geometrical patterns that

provides outputs of well-controlled duration
* Purkinje cells: lat parallel cells in sequential planes
alll fibers: axons parallel to one another; perpendicular to planes of Purkinje
calls

‘The greater the number of excited Purkinje cells, the greater their collective
duration of response

 

[read through slide first]

Basically parallel fibers send messages out one after the other. Ifonly a few
signals from these fibers reach the purkinje cells, they won't fire for very long.
(On the other hand, if these parallel fibers are continually fring, they'll
essentially lengthen the amount of time the purkinj cells will fire

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 22
Parallel Fibers and Purkinje Cells

 

Here's a couple of diagrams just to show you how these cells are organized in
‘the cerebellum.

 

‘The pinkish-red cells are purkinje cells, and you can see how they're organized
in this really nice pattern. The yellow lines here are parallel fibers, which run
across the length of the purkinje cells.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 23
Cellular Organization of the Cerebellum
Parallel fibers excite Purkinje cells

Purkinje cells transmit inhibitory messages to the cells in the nuclel of the
cerebellum (clusters of cell bodies in the interior of the cerebellum) and
the vestibular nuclei in the brain stem

‘Messages then sent to the midbrain and the thalamus

 

So how does this all come together? Well, you have these parallel fibers that
lie across the top of purkinje cells. And they synapse onto and excite purkinje
cells. Purkinje cells are primarily inhibitory, meaning that when they're
excited they send out an inhibitory signal (typically in the form of GABA).
‘This inhibitory signal travels to two areas: the nuclei of the cerebellum, and
the vestibular nuclei in the brain stem

‘Their job is to basically regulate the signals received from different areas of
the body. If you think about it, many of the signals that come from the rest of
the body are excitatory. Purkinje cells inhibit these different excitatory
responses strategically, which controls when and how all of this excitatory
information reaches the rest of the brain. So they essentially regulate
‘movement by telling the brain and body when to inhibit certain actions.

I've included another 2-minute neuroscience video if you're interested in
learning more. Again, this goes into WAY more detail than our class, but it’s
here if you're interested!

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 24
The Basal Ganglia

The basal ganglia is a group of large
subcortical structures in the forebrain
«© Primarily responsible for initiating
‘more voluntary (and less reflexive)

behaviors

Comprised of the following structures*:
» Caudate nucleus

» Putamen

» Globus pallidus

 

‘Okay, let's move on and talk about another major structure involved in
movement: the basal ganglia, We talked a little about the basal ganglia in our
lecture on neuroanatomy, but now we're going to look at it a much more
closely.

So, the basal ganglia isn't just a single structure, it’s actually a group of
subcortical structures in the forebrain, which are listed in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 25
The Basal Ganglia

Caudate nucleus and putamen (together called the striatum)
“Receive input from the cerebral cortex
+ Send output to the globus palidus

Globus pallidus sends output to the thalamus

‘Thalamus relays information to other motor areas and the prefrontal
cortex

 

So let's talk about what each of these substructures is responsible for. To give
‘you a general idea, you should read through the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 26
The Basal Ganglia

Two pathways:

© Direct (excitatory) > enhances a selected movement
* Inhibits the globus pallidus, which inhibits part ofthe thalamus
«Net result sexton!

“Indirect (inhibitory) > inhibits competing movements
* This one's complicated.
+ Inhibits the globus palldus, which inhibits the subthalamic nucleus
«The subthalamic nucleus lops back and excites part ofthe globus pallidus
Causes inhibition ofthe thalamic nucle!
+ Net result isinhibtion!

 

‘There are actually two pathways involved here: the direct and indirect
pathway,

[read through the direct pathway first] Basically, the thalamus tends to send
‘out inhibitory signals with regards to movement. When it receives an
inhibitory signal from the globus pallidus, the net result is an excitation, which
‘can initiate movement.

[Now read through the indirect pathway. Take a deep breath, and read the little
footnote at the bottom. All I want you to know is the function of each pathway,
not how they workin detail. But hate hand-wavy explanations, so I made you
read through ths just so you would have an idea of what's involved ©]

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 27
The Basal Ganglia

@®@

Want bre summary? Se: hin /v youtube com/watch a OO24PSGzIND

 

   

isa diagram of the two pathways — the direct on the left and the indirect
con the right. 've also included yet another two-minute neuroscience video, in
case you'd like a quick summary of what | just described.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 28
Brain Areas and Motor Learning

The learning of new skills requires multiple brain areas involved in the

control of movement

Basal ganglia is critical for learning motor skill, organizing sequences of
‘movernent, “automatic” behaviors, and new habits

© Example: driving a car

«The pattern of activity of the neurons in the motor cortex becomes more
consistent as a new skills learned

 

‘The basal ganglia is especially relevant for the learning of new skills, which
‘you can read about in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 29
Conscious Decisions and Movement

The conscious decision to move, and the movement itself, occur at two
different times

A readiness potential is a particular type of activity in the motor cortex
that occurs before any type of voluntary movement

© Begins atleast 200ms before the movement

+ Implies that we become conscious of the decision to move after the process
has already begun!

 

‘Okay, that does it forthe basal ganglia, There's a section in your book that,
‘goes into more detail about the specific movements it controls, and I highly
recommend you read up on that section while you're studying, as this is
information I would like you to know for this class.

But let’s move on now and talk about conscious decisions and movement,

So, this might seem a little unintuitive, but the conscious decision to move and
‘the movement itself actually occur at two different times.

‘Our brains have something called a readiness potential, which involves,
activation in the motor cortex that can be observed before any type of
voluntary movement is actually made. Research has shown that this potential
starts at least 200ms before the movement itself occurs, which is really crazy,
because it implies that we move first and become conscious of that movement
later!

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 30
Libet’s Study of Conscious Decisions and
Movement

 

‘This was one of my favorite studies to learn about when | was an
undergraduate... although I have to say, its results have been called into
question in recent years, But! | think it's still worth learning about, because
it'll get you thinking about the potential disconnect between how our bodies
behave and our conscious perception of how our bodies behave. So here's
how the study went...

‘A participant was hooked up to an EEG and a sensor was placed on their wrist.
‘They were asked to watch a display in which a light moved around a clack.
‘They were told that they could move their wrist whenever they wanted, but
to note where the light was on the clock when they decided to move.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 31
Libet’s Study of Conscious Decisions and
Movement

 

‘This diagram on the right here is their brain activity as they made the decision
‘to move and then moved. On average, people reported that their decision to
move occurred about 200ms before they actually moved, and the brain's
readiness potential reflected that. Looking at the diagram, the readiness
potential began at least 300ms before the reported decision, which itself
occurred about 200ms before the movement.

So | think this is really cool. It suggests that your brain starts preparing to
make a movement BEFORE you consciously decide to move. You become
conscious of the decision to move after the process to initiate movernent has
already begun. | can't say this enough - that’s really cool! But lke I said, this is
a controversial finding. Your book actually does a good job addressing some of
‘these concerns. | unfortunately don’t have time to go over them here, but the
information is there if you're interested.

-------------------------------------------

Week 7, Lecture 2 - Brain Mechanisms of Movement - Page 32
Questions for your discussion groups..

4. Describe the lateral and medial corticospinal tracts, both in terms of
physiology and function

2. How does the basal ganglia initiate movement?

 

‘Okay, that does it fr the second lecture in our series for this week. Our last
and final lecture will cover movement disorders. See you all there! ©