Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 0
Hunger

WEEK 9, LECTURE 3

 

To finish up the lecture series for this week, lets talk about hunger.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 1
Hunger

Animals vary in their eating

strategies

« Predators have large digestive
systems adapted to huge, infrequent

© Bears eat constantly

«= Small birds eat only what is needed at
‘the moment (preserves light weight
for flight)

© Chickadees eat enough daily to
increase body weight 10 percent
«Then lose it at night keeping warm

 

Broadly defined, hunger is a motivational state that drives organisms to
consume food, which supplies the body with energy and other nutrients to
carry out its essential processes.

All animals experience hunger, but they differ widely in their eating strategies.
You can read about some of these strategies above. As you read through, I'd
like you to think about the relative size of these different animals, and how
much energy their bodies would need to function. Eating is tied to energy
consumption.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 2
Digestion and Food Selection

Digestive system function

» Breaks down food into smaller molecules
that the cells can use

Digestion begins in the mouth

© Enzymes in saliva break down
carbohydrates

Hydrochloric acid and enzymes in the

stomach digest proteins

 

Inall animals, the consumption of food is controlled by the digestive system.
‘The broad function of this system is to break down food into smaller
‘components, which can then be used by cells to perform necessary body
processes.

Digestion actually starts in the mouth. Saliva contains enzymes that break
down food ~ especially carbohydrates. From there, food moves to the stomach,
‘where hydrochloric acid and different enzymes digest proteins.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 3
Digestion and Food Selection:
The Intestines

Enzymes in the small intestine digest
proteins, fats, and carbohydrates
* Digested food absorbs into the
bloodstream

The large intestine absorbs water
and minerals

* Lubricates the remaining materials to
pass as feces

 

From the stomach, food moves into the intestines. In the small intestine,
enzymes digest proteins, fats, and what's left ofthe carbohydrates. All of the
food digested here moves through the walls of the intestine and into the blood
stream,

Finally, food moves into the large intestine, which absorbs any remaining
minerals and water. Anything we don’t need at that point is excreted as feces.
Digestion is, overal, an incredibly efficient process.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 4
Consumption of Dairy Products

‘tthe age of wearing, ost mammals love the
Imetabotngactse (the sugar founain rl)

IMikconsumpton after weaning can case ga nd
Stomach comps

Many man ats ave enough lactase to
fons mik and the ary produts throughout
thas ietine

Neat aus in Chine and serounding counties
Ink the gee hat enables at fo metabolize

oa eit iy cca

"rom Wie Conan 201)

 

‘This is a bit of a tangent, but there's an interesting case of eating and digestion
\which involves the consumption of dairy products ~ mainly, lactose
intolerance. You can read through the slide for more information,

People who are able to consume dairy products can likely do so because their
ancestors domesticated cattle. This was more common in places like Europe
and parts of Africa, and less so in places like China ~ hence the larger
percentage of lactose intolerance in that area.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 5
Food Selection and Behavior

Unsubstantiated beliefs may influence food selection
© Examples.

* Sugar intake increases hyperactivity in children

« Eating turkey increases body supply of tryptophan, which makes you sleepy

«© Adage that fish is brain food is partly true
© Eating fish may help improve memory (mos likely due to presence of omega-3 fatty
acids)

 

‘There are also a lot of myths surrounding why we eat the things we eat... for
example, the idea that sugar intake increases hyperactivity in children. This is,
patently false; studies that have looked at children’s sugar consumption found
no increase in activity after eating a sugary snack, compared to a sugarless
snack.

‘Similarly, while it’s true that tryptophan can increase melatonin production,
you can't really consume enough of it through eating turkey for it to have a
significant effect. It's more likely that people get sleepy on Thanksgiving
because they eat alot in general, and eat a lot of carbs in particular. Carbs
increase insulin production, and insulin pushes other amino acids out of the
way, which clears the way for tryptophan to enter the brain,

‘On the other hand, there is some credence to the idea that fish is “brain food,”
although this is still an area of active research,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 6
Short- and Long-Term Regulation
of Feeding

ral factors
The desire to taste and chew are also
‘motivating factors in hunger and satiety

© Humans have been chewing gum since
4500 B..
Evidence from sham-feeding

experiments

© Everything an animal eats leaks out of a Neste chewing gum
tube connected to the stomach or (5700 eon ot)
esophagus

+ Do not reliably produce satiety

 

Feeding behavior is regulated by a number of different factors and different
areas of your brain and body. For example, we have oral factors which actually
increase the sense of reward you get from eating.

‘These oral factors are important > your book describes a study in which
students were basically fed through feeding tubes for a week, and while they
reported feeling satiated (i, full), they also reported having a strong desire to
taste or chew something.

‘On the other hand, animals that are able to chew their food but then have a
tube that shunts the food out of their bodies will eat almost continually. So
taste is important, but it does not significantly contribute to the feeling of
being full

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 7
The Stomach and Intestines:
Nerves

The main signal to stop eating is the distention of the stomach

‘The vagus nerve
© Cranial nerve X
© Conveys information about the stretching of the stomach walls to the brain

 

Much like with thirst, satiety is measured by the distention of the stomach,
‘This information is communicated by one of the cranial nerves ~ the vagus
nerve (or cranial nerve X) ~ which travels from the brain all the way down to
the stomach. This nerve essentially “measures” the stretching of the stomach,
and communicates that information to the brain, which will then signal a stop
to the feeling of hunger (given that the stomach is full enough, of course.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 8
The Stomach and Intestines:
Duodenum

© Part of the small intestine
« Site of initial absorption of significant amounts of nutrients

Distention of the duodenum can also produce feelings of satiety

‘The duodenum also releases the hormone cholecystokinin (CCK), which
helps to regulate hunger

 

In addition to the vagus nerve, there's another structure called the duodenum,
‘that contributes to feelings of satiety. This area is part of the small intestine,
and its actually where the majority of nutrients are absorbed during digestion,
‘The duodenum measures distention of the small intestine and releases a
hormone called cholecystokinin (CCK for short), which can contribute to a
sense of fullness.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 9
The Stomach and Intestines:
CCK

Cholecystokinin (CCK) released by the duodenum regulates hunger by...
© Closing the sphincter muscle between the stomach and duodenum and
causing the stomach to hold its contents and fill faster

« Stimulating the vagus nerve to send a message to the hypothalamus

that releases a chemical similar to CCK

 

Let’s actually talk litle more about CCK. How, exactly, does it regulate
hunger? You can read more about this inthe slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 10
Glucose, Insulin, and Glucagon

Glucose
© Main product of digestion

+ Important source of energy for the body
© Nearly the only fuel used by the brain

Insulin and glucagon regulate the flow of glucose into cells,

Excess glucose enters the liver and fat cells

 

So that is, generally, how satiety is regulated via the stomach. Let's zoom in a
little now and talk about some of the components that are involved in this,
process: mainly, glucose, insulin, and glucagon, We'll start with a broad
description and move from there to a discussion of how they all work together.

Most of the food you eat gets converted into glucose. It’s the main product of
digestion, a primary source of energy for the body, and the only fuel used for
brain processes.

Insulin and glucagon are pancreatic hormones that regulate the flow of glucose
into the cells to aid with various bodily processes. Any glucose that does not
‘get used is stored in the liver, and in fat cells.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 11
Insulin and Glucagon
Feedback System

 

‘These three components work together to produce a cycle of hunger and
satiety. This is how it all plays out: When you feel hungry, you eat, and
“glucose levels rise (both before and during eating). This causes the pancreas to
release insulin, which helps glucose enter cells. When glucose enters cells this
suppresses hunger and decreases eating, which in turn lowers glucose levels,
until the body experiences hunger again.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 12
Insulin and Glucagon
Feedback System

 

‘This part of the cycle is worth looking at a little more closely, which we'll do
‘on the next slide,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 13
Insulin and Glucagon Feedback System

After a meal

© Blood glucose levels fall

+ Insulin levels drop

© Glucose enters cells more slowly

«= Hunger increases
© The pancreas releases glucagon

 

Afier eating, and after insulin moves glucose into the cells, both glucose and
insulin levels drop (glucose because it's being used, and insulin because it's no
longer needed). As a result ofthe drop in insulin, the movement of glucose
into cells slows down... and with that, comes an increase in hunger (to
‘motivate an individual to supply the body with more of i). As this is
happening, the pancreas releases glucagon.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 14
Glucagon

Hormone released by the pancreas when glucose levels fall
© Stimulates the liver to convert some ofits stored glycogen to glucose, which is
Used to replenish low supplies in the blood

 

‘we haven't talked much about glucagon yet, but broadly, it’s a hormone
that’s released by the pancreas at the point when glucose levels decrease.
Glucagon essentially triggers stored glucose to start being used by the body -
‘you can read about this in more detail above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 15
Insulin Levels

If insulin level stays constantly hi

The body continues rapidly moving
blood glucose into the cells long after
ameal

«Blood glucose drops and hunger

increases in spite of high insulin levels,

“Food is rapidly deposited as fat and
‘lycogen

© Causes weight gain

* Valuable preparation for wintrin some

 

‘There are some cases ~ say, when overeating, when insulin levels maintain a
consistently high level. You can read about the consequences of this above.
‘Notice how this changes the cycle we've been discussing.

‘When this happens, blood glucose is continually stored as fat and glycogen. It
‘becomes increasingly difficult to mobilize the stored nutrients, and because of
‘that it’s easier to become hungry even after eating (the body does not see the
stored nutrients as available for use, soit triggers a hunger state to acquire

more). The consequence of this is weight gain, which is good for some animals
‘but can be harmful for others.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 16
Type | Diabetes

In people with Type | diabetes, insulin
levels remain constantly low, but blood
glucose levels are high

© People eat more food than normal,

but excrete the glucose unused and
lose weight
«= Cycle of untreated Type | Diabetes >

 

‘Type 1 diabetes is a condition that affects insulin and glucose levels. More
specifically, with this condition, insulin levels are consistently low, but blood
«glucose levels are high. You can read about the consequences for this in the
slides above. Notice again how these two factors alter the cyele.

Because of low insulin levels, the glucose in the blood can’t enter the cells,
either to be stored or to be used. And so individuals with Type I diabetes end
up excreting glucose in their urine while their cells are starving, which could
be incredibly harmful

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 17
Leptin
Long-term hunger regulation is accomplished by the m« ring of fat supplies
by the body

‘The body's fat cells produce the peptide leptin, which signals the brain to
Increase or decrease eating

Low levels of leptin increase hunger

High levels reduce eating and increase physical and immune system activity

High levels of leptin do not necessarily decrease hunger
© Obesity is associated with a lower sensitivity to leptin
+ Sensitivity declines during pregnancy and when animals prepare for hibernation

Puberty is triggered by a certain level of leptin during adolescence

 

So far we've been talking about short-term sensations of hunger: for example,
‘throughout the day we experience cycles of hunger and satiety.

"Now the question is: how does the body regulate more long-term sensations of
hunger? How do we know if we are in a critical state of hunger (i.c.,
starvation), for example?

‘This is regulated largely by a peptide called leptin, which you can read about
above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 18
Brain Mechanisms of Hunger

Information from all parts of the body regarding hunger impinge onto the
arcuate nucleus

‘The arcuate nucleus is a part of the hypothalamus containing two sets of
neurons.

© Neurons sensitive to hunger signals
© Neurons sensitive to satiety signals

 

‘Okay, so that does it for short-term and long-term sensations of hunger. Let's
move on and talk about what happens in the brain when hunger and satiety are
triggered.

Firstly, hungerisatiety information from all parts ofthe body connect to one
specific area of the brain ~ the arcuate nucleus ~ which is located in the
hypothalamus (I'm sorry, I couldn't find a good image of this area for some
reason),

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 19
The Arcuate Nucleus

Input to thes
© Signals of both long-term and short-term satiety

istention of the intestine triggers neurons to release the
neurotransmitter CCK

© Blood glucose stimulates satiety cells in the arcuate nucleus
© Body fat releases leptin

 

You can read alittle more about this structure in the slide above. As you're
reading, I'd like you to think about how each component of hunger functions

(eg., CCK, glucose, leptin), and how they're related to the functioning of the
arcuate nucleus.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 20
The Paraventricular Hypothalamus
Output from the arcuate nucleus goes to the paraventricular nucleus of
the hypothalamus

© Thisis a part of the hypothalamus that inhibits the lateral hypothalamus,
(which is an area important for eating)

«= Axons from the satiety-sensitive cells ofthe arcuate nucleus deliver an
excitatory message to the paraventricular nucleus
Causes release of melanocortin..

 

Signals travel from the arcuate nucleus to the paraventricular nucleus, which is
‘also located in the hypothalamus. You can read more about this area above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 21
Melanocortin

Chemical important in limiting food intake
© Deficiencies ofthis receptor lead to overeating

Receives input from the hunger cells of the arcuate nucleus..

+ Excites the paraventricular nucleus
* Which, in turn inhibits the lateral hypothalamus and induces satiety

 

As mentioned in the previous slide, excitation from the satiety-sensitive area
of the arcuate nucleus cause the paraventricular nucleus to release a chemical
called melanocortin. This chemical is responsible for promoting feelings of
satiety. You can read more about it above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 22
Inhibitory Neurotransmitters

‘A combination of GABA, neuropeptide Y (NPY), and agouti-related peptide
(AgRP) are involved in inducing feelings of hunger

'NPY and AgRP block the satiety action of the paraventricular nucleus and
provoke overeating

 

So there are three inhibitory neurotransmitters involved in feelings of hunger
and satiety: GABA, neuropeptide Y (NPY for short), and agouti-related
peptide (agRP for short). These neurotransmitters inhibi the paraventricular
nucleus. In the previous slide, | mentioned that excitation of the
paraventricular nucleus inhibits the lateral hypothalamus, which creates a
feeling of fullness,

(On the flipside, inhibition of the paraventricular nucleus prevents an animal
from feeling full ~ that is, it promotes a feeling of hunger

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 23
Ghrelin

Neurotransmitter released in the brain
‘Acts on the hypothalamus to increase appetite

‘Triggers stomach contractions

 

A neurotransmitter known as ghrelin functions to increase hunger. You can
read more about it in the slide above,

Ghrelin increases appetite both by up-regulating the reward system in response
{to food, and inhibiting the parts of the vagus nerve that measure stomach
distension. It also triggers stomach contractions, which increases the rate of
digestion (and specifically, the emptying of the stomach).

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 24
Orexin

There is an additional pathway from paraventricular nucleus that induces
cells in the lateral hypothalamus to release orexin

Orexin increases animals’ persistence in seeking food
® Influences response to incentives and reinforcement in general

 

Finally, we have orexin (a.k.a. hypocretin), which is a neuropeptide involved
in both sleep and hunger.

Signals from the paraventricular pathway trigger the release of orexin in the
lateral hypothalamus, which induces a feeling of hunger. You can read
(slightly) more about it in the slide above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 25
Hypothalamic Transmitters of Feeding

 

Last quarter I made a fantastic joke in class about how this chart would be on
‘the exam. The look of sheer terror on everyone's face... It just doesn't have
‘the same effect in writing :/

In any case, you do NOT have to memorize this chart for this class. However,
if you take a few minutes to examine it (I recommend starting with one
specific tract [hunger vs. satiety motive] and slowly following it from start to
finish), you'll see that it gives an incredibly good explanation of how the
hunger and satiety systems work in tandem. Green lines here are excitatory,
and red lines are inhibitory.

As an example, hunger signals increase feeding by inhibiting inhibitory
‘messages to the lateral hypothalamus. You can see that if you start at the
“hunger-motive,” and notice that the inhibitory signals from both leptin and.
insulin cause the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters (such as GABA),
which in turn inhibit the functioning of the paraventricular nucleus. Inhibition
of inhibition leads to excitation, and that excitation plus the addition of ghrelin
serve to increase appetite. Okay, now it's your turn to try that, but with the
“satiety-motive” pathway!

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 26
The Lateral Hypothalamus

Feeding-related functions of the lateral hypothalamus.
© Controls insulin secretion
« Alters taste responsiveness

Stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus increases the drive to eat

© Damage to this area causes aversion to food

 

All of these signals eventually end up at the lateral hypothalamus, which
‘triggers the motivational behaviors associated with hunger and satiety. You can
read a brief summary of this structure above, and we'll talk about it in more
detail over the next few slides.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 27
The Lateral,
Ventromedial,
and Paraventricular

Hypothalamus

 

Before we get into it, this is a coronal view ofa rat brain that shows the
location of the lateral, ventromedial (which we haven't discussed much), and
‘paraventricular sections of the hypothalamus. The human brain is structured
similarly, at least in terms of these areas, and so this is a helpful comparison to
make. Again, you don't need to memorize these locations ~ ths is just here to
«give you point of reference when you're thinking about these areas.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 28
Recovery after damage to the lateral
hypothalamus in rats

 

But let’s talk a little more about the functions of the lateral hypothalamus. If
‘you damage the lateral hypothalamus in rats, they will completely refuse food
land water at first. If you force feed them for a period of time, they'll
eventually ~ and very slowly ~ regain their normal appetites. However, their
appetites will never return to normal ~ they'll eat just enough to stay alive, and
‘only drink during meals to wash down food. Also, if you expose them to
stressful conditions, they'll revert back to refusing all food and water.

 

‘The take-home message here is that changes to this area can be pretty
devastating, and even though recover occurs to some degree, individuals with
1a damaged lateral hypothalamus never make a full recovery.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 29
The Lateral Hypothalamus and Axons

ery arone acne oan ss
throtgh te ateral ypottetamus
onan

a mi eto dation,
rience ee

~ Gar coat rape
episgpeoatssumanatoy
a

«Tagen tary anes hormone
ements ereton
+ Conta iesie secretions vga
Seale wee

 

‘The pathways of the lateral hypothalamus are dopaminergic, meaning the

axons that comprise these pathways are primarily involved in the transmission
‘of dopamine.

‘These axons fire onto a number of different areas and have a number of
different functions, all of which you can read about in the slide above.

‘The diagram above shows a number of the different pathways we've been
discussing over the past few slides. You can see that this area plays a fairly
large role in a lot of the different processes in charge of hunger and satiety! It
‘can alter motivational states, modulate insulin release, even control digestive
secretions.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 30
Medial Areas of the Hypothalamus

Output from the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) inhibits feeding
© Damage to this nucleus leads to overeating and weight gain
«Rats eat normal sized meals but eat more frequently
«In contrast to rats with paraventricular nucleus damage, who eat the same

number of meals but more food during each meal
«Causes increased stomach motility > stomach empties faster than normal
« Also damages insulin production > most food gets stored as fat
* Because ofthis, preventing animals with VMH damage from overeating wil stil
lead to weight gain!

 

Finally, we have the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), which also plays a
role in eating behaviors. Specifically, his area seems to respond to satiety, and
stops feeding behavior as a response. Ifyou damage this area, it will lead to
‘overeating and weight gain, You can read more about consequences of VMH
‘damage in the slide above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 31
Effects of Damage to the Ventromedial
Hypothalamus

 

‘This first image here shows a comparison between two rats: the one on the left
has a damaged VMH, and the one on the right does not.

 

‘The graph shows the difference in eating behavior between rats with an intact
vs. damaged VMH. Shortly after damaging the VMH, rats will begin eating
‘way more than their intact counterparts ~ you can see that by looking at the red
line (which is the damaged rat) and comparing it to the blue line (which is the
rat with the intact VMH).

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 32
Eating Disorders

‘Availabilty of tasty, high calorie foods makes animals (and people) obese, and
they find other rewards less rewarding
Psychological distress does not appear to cause weight gain
* Weak link between depression and weight gain, but not significant enough to be a
primary factor
A high-fat diet before birth can result in the offspring being born with a larger
than average lateral hypothalamus

* Produces more orexin and other neurotransmitters that lead to increased eating,
behaviors,

Other disorders not discussed here (which you should know for the exam):
* Bulimia nervosa

+ Anorexia nervosa

 

Let's finish up by discussing a few cases of non-typical eating and satiety
‘behavior. | say that these instances are non-typical because they are less
‘common compared to what we consider “average” food consumption
‘bchaviors (although as a caveat this concept of “average” can be subject to a
number of different factors that cause it to vary overtime and across cultures).
‘These behaviors may also be harmifl to individuals that exhibit them.

 

You can read more about these different behaviors in the slide above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 33
Genetics and Body Weight

Thin parents tend to have thin children and heavy parents tend to have
heavy children

Specific types of obesity have high heritability...
© Syndromal obesity > a gene causes a medical problem that includes obesity

«Example: Prader Will syndrome > genetic condition marked by intellectual disability, shor
stature, and obesity high blood levels of ghrelin

= Monogenic obesity > People with a mutated gene for the receptors for
‘melanocortin overeat (recall that melanocortin is responsible for satiety)

= Polygenic/common obesity -> many genes can contribute to obesity, and the
probability of being obese increases with the presence of each gene

 

‘There is some indication that body weight is determined, at least in part, by
‘genetics. As a general example, thin parents tend to have thin children, and
heavier parents tend to have heavier children,

More specifically, it appears that specific types of obesity have high
heritability ~ meaning that more of their variance can be attributed to genes vs.
environmental factors. You can read more about these cases above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 3 - Hunger - Page 34
Questions for your discussion groups...

1. How do insulin, glucose, and glucagon work together in the cycle of
hunger and satiety?

‘What are ghrelin, orexin, and melanocortin, and how do they each
contribute to feelings of hunger/satiety?

 

‘Okay, that does it for this week! I know I've been saying this for the last three
‘weeks, but I can actually hold full conversations with people now, so by next
‘week I will have my voice back enough to give our last lecture, Good luck this
‘week, and I hope to see you in the lecture chat!