Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 0
Thirst

WEEK 9, LECTURE 2

 

Let's continue our discussion of internal regulation by moving on to another
body process ~ thirst ~ which in this class we're referring to as the desire to
drink fluids (as opposed to any other definitions you might know).

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 1
Thirst
Water constitutes 70 percent ofthe
mammalian body

Water in the body must be regulated
within narrow limits

© Sufficient fluid is needed in circulatory
system,

‘The concentrations of different
chemicals in water determines the rate
of all chemical reactions in the body

 

As you probably know from reading the lids of Snapple bottles or going to
children’s museums, mammalian bodies consist of nearly 70% water. This is a
large amount, but it’s also a highly optimal amount for mammals ~ water is
needed for many bodily processes, and the set point here varies within
incredibly narrow limits. Too much or too little water can be extremely
dangerous,

As I mentioned, we need a lot of water in order to regulate normal body
functions. For example, the circulatory system needs water to help pump and
distribute blood throughout the body. The chemicals contained in water also
dictate the rate of different chemical reactions in the body. So if we didn’t
have sufficient water, processes like neurotransmission would not be possible.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 2
Mechanisms of Water Regulation

Human mechanisms of water regulation vary depending on circumstances

Water levels can be maintained by.
» Excreting dilute urine (gets rid of excess water)

© Decreasing sweat (retains water)

‘Most often, water regulation is accomplished by drinking more water than
we need and excreting the rest

 

‘There's a lot of variance in how different species maintain water levels, and
even within humans this can vary widely depending on different
environmental circumstances. Generally speaking, though, water levels are
‘maintained by two processes, which you can read about above.

‘The easiest way to regulate ths is to consume an excess of water and excrete
the rest.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 3
Mechanisms of Water Regulation:
Vasopressin

Vasopressin is a hormone released

by the posterior pituitary gland cd
“Also known aan antureic rate
jormane (ADH) te
+ Raises blood pressure by constricting =

blood vessels

“= Helps to compensate for decreased
water volume (inept

Enables the kidneys to reabsorb a
Water and excrete highly nin fee Cin
concentrated urine aoe

 

‘Our pituitary glands release a hormone called vasopressin (also known as
“antidiuretic hormone”), which helps our bodies conserve water when it’s
scarce, but also when we're unable to consume water, like when we're asleep.
You can read about how it functions in the slide above.

‘The diagram here is meant to help you, not hurt you. Start at the
“hypothalamus” and work your way down. You can see the role of
vasopressin, and how it eventually enables water to be reabsorbed from the
kidneys. This is an incredibly efficient process, as it ensures that all necessary
‘water is absorbed. The result is highly concentrated urine ~ it’s highly
‘concentrated because it only contains the most unnecessary amounts of water
and other waste products.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 4
Types of Thirst

Two different kinds of thirst.
© Osmotic thirst: results from eating salty foods

© Hypovolemic thirst: a thirst resulting from loss of fluids due to bleedi
or sweating

Fixed concentration of solutes in the body is a set point
© 0.15 M (molar) in mammals

 

‘There are actually two different types of thirst, although we experience them

as generally the same motivational feeling (there are subtle differences, which
‘we'll discuss here). You can read very general descriptions of these two types
of thirst above.

We have a set point for the amount of solutes in the body. Solutes are
‘molecules of any particle that are present in a given solution. In mammals, this
set point is at 15 molar, meaning that there are .15 particles or solutes per unit
of liquid. If we deviate from this set point, mechanisms like thirst kick in to
return to it

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 5
Osmotic Pressure

Solutes inside and outside a cell create osmotic pressure
© Water flows across a semi-permeable membrane from an area of low solute

concentration (comparatively low molarity) to an area of high solute
concentration (comparatively high molarity)

© Occurs when solutes are more concentrated on one side of the membrane
“ Helps even out the molarity

 

‘One such mechanism for returning to this set point is something called osmotic
pressure, which you can read about above.

Basically, when there are more solutes on one side of the membrane, it means,
‘that the molarity is higher on that side compared to the other. Water will tend
to flow rowards the side with more solutes in order to even out the molarity.
‘This should sound somewhat familiar ~ recall the process of diffusion from
‘our lecture on neurotransmission. This is a similar ~ though not identical ~
process, and I'll leave it to you to think about how they are similar and
different from one another.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 6
The Consequence of a Difference in
Osmotic Pressure

 

‘This how this process might look at the neuronal level. You have more solutes
(indicated here by the green particles) on the outside of the cell, and water will
‘want to flow outside to equalize the molarity inside and outside the cell. The
result is thatthe cell itself will shrink, because it loses water,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 7
Osmotic Pressure

Eating salty food causes sodium ions to spread through the blood and

extracellular fluid of the cell

© The higher concentration of solutes outside the cell results in osmotic
pressure, drawing water from the cell to the extracellular fluid

Certain neurons detect the loss of water and trigger osmotic thirst to help
restore the body to its normal state

 

As you might've guessed, osmotie pressure can lead to osmotic thirst. You can
read about this process more in the slide above,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 8
Detecting Osmotic Pressure

The brain detects osmotic pressure
from,

« Receptors around the third ventricle
© The OVIT (organum vasculosum

laminae terminalis) and the
subfornical organ (SFO) detect osmotic
pressure and sodium content of the
blood

© Receptors in the periphery, including
the stomach and digestive tract,

 

‘The brain doesn’t detect the change in osmotic pressure from everywhere ~
there are specific parts of the brain and body that send these signals,

For example, there is an area around the third ventricle in which the blood-
brain barrier is very weak; this area can easily monitor the concentration of
fluids in the bloodstream, and report to other areas of the brain like the
hypothalamus (which controls the sensation of thirst).

‘There are also these other brain areas: the OVLT and SFO (subfornical organ),
which help detect osmotic pressure ~ as well as areas in the periphery like the
digestive tract. The book goes over these in much more detail, and I suggest
‘you read up on this section for the next exam,

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 9
IOVLT, SFO (and other)
Receptors

Receptors in the OVLT, SFO, stomach,
and elsewhere relay information to
two areas of the hypothalamus.
* Supraoptic nucleus
Paraventrcular nucleus
* Both contol the rate a which the
posterior ptultary releases vasopressin

Receptors also relay information to
the lateral preoptic area, which
controls drinking behavior

 

Receptors from these different brain and peripheral areas relay information to
‘two main areas of the hypothalamus: the supraoptic nucleus, and the
‘paraventricular nucleus. Both structures control the rate of release of
vasopressin, This diagram shows a little more detail than what we're talking
about, but you can focus on the relevant areas (circled in red) to see where
they're located within the hypothalamus. And you can see that both structures
have a direct connection to the posterior pituitary.

‘These receptors also communicate with the lateral preoptic area, which
controls the behavior of drinking itself.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 10
Osmotic Thirst

When osmotic thirst is triggered, water that you drink must be absorbed
through the digestive system.

«Delivered by the blood to the brain

«© Process takes about 15 minutes

‘To inhibit thirst, the body monitors swallowing and detects the distension
of the stomach and intestines

 

‘What happens once osmotic thirst is triggered? Read through the first three
points above.

‘These are largely allostatic processes ~ if you eat something salty, for example,
‘your body will anticipate the change in osmotic pressure and motivate you to
{drink something (hopefully water) before the change in pressure actually
‘occurs, Similarly, we often get thirsty (for something to drink) right before
bed, and this motivational state is your body anticipating not being able to
drink for an extended period of time.

"Now, what stops us from continuing to drink once we start? The body actually
‘monitors how much the stomach and intestines distend, or exert pressure,
‘which increases as more water enters these areas.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 11
Hypovolemic Thirst and Sodium-Specific
Hunger

Hypovolemic thirst is associated with a lower volume of body fluids
© Need to replace salts as well as fluids

Low blood volume ~ kidneys release the enzyme renin which helps form
angiotensin |

© Other enzymes convert that into angiotensin It

+ Like vasopressin, angiotensin I constrict blood vessels to compensate for a
drop in blood pressure

+ Angiotensin Il stimulates neurons in areas adjoining the third ventricle
= Neurons in the third ventricle send axons to the hypothalamus where
angiotensin Il is released as a neurotransmitter

 

So that’s osmotic thirst. Lets shift gears a little now and talk about the other
type of thirst ~ hypovolemic thirst. Whereas osmotic thirst is associated with
the concentration of solutes in the body, hypovolemic thirst is more concerned
‘with the volume of fluids in the body (although it also helps replace salts)

How does this process actually work? You can read about it more above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 12
Hypovolemic Thirst and Sodium-Specific
Hunger

Thirst is associated with a lower volume of body fluids

Low blood volume ~ kidneys release the enzyme renin which helps form
angiotensin |
© Other enzymes convert that into angiotensin I!

gat ap nese, ap raimin bens, a> Antena pte ci

Spocnnt enue onan
Stoceoean

 

‘This is justa flow chart to help you when you're studying; it essentially
‘outlines the process I just described.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 13
Hypovolemic Thirst and Sodium-Specific
Hunger
‘Animals with osmotic thirst have a preference for pure water

‘Animals with hypovolemic thirst have a preference for slightly salty water
«Pure water dilutes body fluids and changes osmotic pressure

Sodium-specific hunger - strong craving for salty foods
“= Aldosterone (a hormone produced by the adrenal glands), increases retention
of salt and alters taste system to make salty foods more desirable

 

[read through the first three points above]

‘This process of regulating sodium levels also translates to hunger. Mammals,
have a process called sodium-specific hunger, which induces a strong craving
for salty foods. This is ll controlled by a hormone called aldosterone, which
makes salty foods more rewarding and also increases the retention of sal.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 14
Comparison of Osmotic and
Hypovolemic Thirst

ere ers
by eo
Highsolute | Purewater | OVLT,
‘concentration ‘subfornical
outside cells organ, and
digestive tract
low blood ‘Water Kidneys and
Volume containing _| blood vessels
solutes, near
015M.

Td

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To finish up, this is just a handy chart laying out the differences in the two
{types of thirst. You'll need to know these two processes in much more detail,
‘but I feel like this provides a good summary of the main points of each.

-------------------------------------------

Week 9, Lecture 2 - Thirst - Page 15
Questions for your discussion groups..
1. How does osmotic pressure lead to osmotic thirst?

2. How is hypovolemic thirst different from osmotic thirst? Do not just
define each ~ specifically explain how they're different.

 

‘Okay, here's two questions for your discussion group. I'l see you in the next
lecture, which is on hunger!