Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 0
Why do we sleep?

WEEK 8, LECTURE 3

 

‘This lecture is going to cover a really important aspect of sleep that we haven’t
really discussed yet ~ what is the actual function of sleep?

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 1
Why Sleep? Why REM? Why Dreams?

We appear to have evolved mechanisms that force us to sleep

Involuntary inhibitory processes in our brains force us to become less
aroused and less alert, and thus enable us to sleep

 

appears that we've evolved mechanisms that force us to sleep. If you go
‘without sleep for long enough, eventually your body will put you in a state of
sleep itself, by inhibiting the brain functions that enable arousal and alertness.
So there does appear to be an important, adaptive reason why we sleep.

‘There's another question related to this, which is why we dream... but we'll
‘get to that later in this lecture.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 2
Functions of Sleep

Some of the many functions of sleep include.
© Resting muscles

«Decreasing metabolism
«= Performing cellular maintenance in neurons

© Reorganizing synapses
© Strengthening memories

 

Above are some proposed functions of sleep.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 3
Sleep and Energy Conservation

The original function of sleep was probably to conserve energy
Conservation of energy is accomplished via...

* Decrease in body temperature of about 1-2 Celsius degrees in mammals
+ Decrease in muscle activity

 

although it seems like the “original” or primary function of sleep is to
‘conserve energy. This is accomplished via a general decrease in temperature
(and corresponding metabolic rate), as well as a decrease in muscle activity
(remember that your brain has a pathway from the pons to the spinal cord that
inhibits the firing of motor neurons).

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 4
Hibernation is Analogous to Sleep

Decrease in body temperature to only slightly above that of the
environment.

Heart rate and brain activity drop to almost nothing,

‘Neuron cell bodies shrink, and dendrites lose almost a fourth of their
branches
«© Replaced later when body temperature increases

 

Hibernation is a special cases ~ its not quite the same as sleep, in that the
body goes through more extreme changes, and of course the length of time is
extended. You can read more about these physiological changes in the slide
above.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 5
Sleep and Memory

Sleep also plays an important role in enhancing learning and strengthening memory
* Performance on a newly learned task soften better the next day if adequate sleep is.
‘achieved during the night

Increased brain activity occurs in the area of the brain activated by a newly learned

task while one is asleep

Patterns of activity in the hippocampus during learning were similar to those shown
during sleep
© Suggests that the brain replays ts daly experiences during sleep

‘The brain strengthens some synapses and weakens others during sleep
Sleep spindles increase in number after new learning > correlated with nonverbal IQ

 

In addition to conserving energy, more recent research has found that sleep
actually plays a large role in memory consolidation, Evidence for
discussed above.

 

‘Speaking to the second-to-last point, it seems like sleep is also good for
updating and increasing the efficiency of neural connections; during this time,
‘the brain prunes unused connections and strengthens those that have been use
a lot. And this is likely related to the brain replaying its daily experiences
{during sleep ~ that helps it determine which information or skills are going to
be useful in the future, and which aren't.

And with regards to this last point, recall that sleep spindles, which occur
{during stage 2 sleep, seem to be related to memory consolidation, It also seems
like they're related to nonverbal IQ, in that individuals who produce more
sleep spindles on average seem to have a higher IQ than those who produce
fewer. So this may be a crucial aspect of encoding new skills and knowledge
into memory.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 6
Amounts of REM Sleep

Humans spend one-third of their life asleep; about one-fifth is spent in
REM

Species vary in amount of sleep time spent in REM.
«Cats spend up to 16 hours a day sleeping with lots of that time in REM sleep

© Among humans, those who get the most sleep have the highest percentage of
REM.

= Percentage of REM sleep is positively correlated with the total amount of
sleep in most animals

 

REM sleep seems to be one of the more important stages of sleep. Humans
spend quite a large proportion of their time asleep in REM sleep - and the
same goes for other species, as well. Generally speaking, animals (and
individuals) that sleep more, tend to get more REM sleepin particular.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 7
Functions of REM Sleep

Research is inconclusive regarding the exact functions of REM sleep
During REM...

The brain may discard useless connections

© Learned motor skills may be consolidated

‘Maurice (1998) suggests the function of REM is simply to shake the
eyeballs back and forth to provide sufficient oxygen to the corneas

 

So that leads us to an important question: what is the purpose of REM sleep? If
‘we spend so much of our sleeping time in this stage, it must be important,

‘The short answer to this question is: we still don’t know! Some interesting
hypotheses have been proposed (and supported with evidence), which you can

read about above (and in more detail in your textbook). The exists evidence to

support each of these points, although nothing conclusive has been found as of
‘yet. But at the very least, this does seem like another period in which the brain
encodes new skills and knowledge in memory (and discards useless skills and

knowledge).

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 8
The Relationship Between Age and REM
Sleep for Humans

nao

 

‘This graph shows how the amount of REM vs. NREM sleep changes over the
lifespan. You can see, first and foremost, that the amount of time we spend
asleep is highest in infancy, and gradually declines as we get older. NREM
sleep actualy stays fairly stable, but REM sleep seems to decrease: infants
spend about 8 hours a day in REM (although sleepin generals different for
infants, so this can be dificult to calculate), while older adults spend about 2
hours in REM. That's a pretty stark difference! But it makes sense if you think
about the proposed function of REM sleep as a state of knowledge
consolidation ~ this is more crucial to do at an earlier stage of life, and so
infants and young children might need more time while asleep to do this.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 9
Biological Perspectives on Dreaming

Biological research on dreaming is complicated by the fact that subjects
cannot often accurately remember what was dreamt
‘Two of the going biological theories of dreaming include...

© The activation-synthesis hypothesis

© The neurocognitive hypothesis,

 

‘Now we come to (at least in my opinion) one of the most interesting questions
about sleep: dreaming. Specifically, why do we dream?

As of now, there are two prominent hypotheses that attempt to answer this
‘question: the activation-synthesis hypothesis, and the neurocognitive
hypothesis. We'll review these over the next few slides.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 10
The Activation-Synthesis Hypothesis
Suggests that dreams begin with spontaneous activity in the pons, which
activates many parts of the cortex

* The cortex synthesizes a story from the patter of activation

+ Normal sensory information f sometimes integrated, but usually isnot

© When dreaming, you are physically unable to move
« Thisis also a common dream!

 

Let's start with the activation synthesis hypothesis. You should read through
the slide first

So, the idea here is thatthe pons is active in REM sleep, and this activation
leads to activation in other areas ofthe brain. In order to make sense ofthis
‘activation, the cortex synthesizes it into a coherent narrative ~ a dream. Under
this hypothesis, dreaming i the result of spontaneous activation, and while the
source ofthat activation is unclear (it might have a funetion, but ths isn't
specified), the purpose of dreaming is to make sense of that activation. Also
note that under this hypothesis, there is very little input from sensory
information.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 11
The Neurocognitive Hypothesis

Braces less emphasis on the pons, REM sleep, et.

+ sgetsthat ren ae sat thitng jr under uns ceamstances

Simitar tothe activation synthesis hypothesis in that dreams bein with arousing stimu
thatare generated within the brain

* simulations combined wth recent meas nd (ome) information fromthe senses

Because the brain is geting litle information from the sense organs, images are
generated without constraints or interference

‘Arousal cannot lead to action as the primary motor cortex and the motor neurons of
the spinal cord are suppressed

Activity in the prefrontal cortex is suppressed, which impairs working memory during
reaming

 

‘There's also the neurocognitive hypothesis, which you should read about first
above.

‘This hypothesis places little emphasis on the pons or even REM sleep. It states
‘that, during sleep, parts of our brain are still active ~ specifically the
“thinking” parts. However, because activity in some areas of the brain is
suppressed (specifically incoming sensory information), this can lead to
unusual or strange perceptions while dreaming. Essentially, you're still
processing information while you're asleep and dreaming, but your brain is
simulating sensory input rather than taking it in directly from the outside
‘world.

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 12
The Neurocognitive Hypothesis:
Conditions

Activity is high...
© In the inferior part ofthe parietal cortex, an area important for visual-spatial
perception
* Patients with damage report problems in binding body sensations with vision and

hhave no dreams
© In areas outside of V1, accounting for the visual imagery of dreams

“In the hypothalamus and amygdala, which accounts for the emotional
and motivational content of dreams

 

And you can see further evidence for this hypothesis if you look at the areas of
the brain that are active while dreaming (you can read about this above).

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 13
The Neurocognitive Hypothesis:
Summary

Either internal or external stimulation activates parts of the parietal,
‘occipital, and temporal cortex

Lack of sensory input from V1 and no criticism from the prefrontal cortex
creates the hallucinatory perceptions

 

‘This is kind of a difficult hypothesis to wrap your head around, so I provided
an incredibly quick and over-simplified summary here, just to tie it all
‘together. Ifyou still have questions after this, feel free to ask me or Sierra!

-------------------------------------------

Week 8, Lecture 3 - Why do We sleep_ - Page 14
Questions for your discussion groups..

4, What is one possible function of sleep? Provide evidence for this
function.

With regards to dreaming, which hypothesis do you endorse more, the
activation-synthesis hypothesis or the neurocognitive hypothesis? Why

do you support that particular hypothesis?

 

‘Okay, that does it for this lecture! The fourth and last lecture will cover sleep
disorders. See you there!